Вестник Томского государственного университета. Филология. 2021. № 70 
 
 
UDC 81`322 
DOI: 10.17223/19986645/70/5 
 
A.M. Lavrentiev1, T.Yu. Sherstinova2, 3,  
A.M. Chepovskiy4, 5, B. Pincemin1 
 
USING TXM PLATFORM FOR RESEARCH ON LANGUAGE 
CHANGES OVER TIME: THE DYNAMICS OF VOCABULARY  
AND PUNCTUATION IN RUSSIAN LITERARY TEXTS1 
 
1 French National Centre for Scientific Research (Lyon, France) 
2 Higher School of Economics (Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation) 
3 Saint-Petersburg State University (Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation) 
4 Higher School of Economics (Moscow, Russian Federation) 
5 RUDN University (Moscow, Russian Federation) 
E-mail: alexei.lavrentev@ens-lyon.fr / tsherstinova@hse.ru / achepovskiy@hse.ru / 
benedicte.pincemin@ens-lyon.fr 
 
The aim of this article is to test the methodological tools provided by TXM open-source 
software for research on dynamics of vocabulary and punctuation marks in diachronic corpo-
ra. TXM provides both quantitative and qualitative analysis features. It is shown that Russian 
revolution of 1917 did make significant changes in the core vocabulary of the corpus of Rus-
sian Short Stories (1901–1930). The same methodology may be used both for diachronic stu-
dies of literature and for various NLP tasks. 
Keywords: stylometry, textometry, TXM platform, corpus linguistics, Russian literature of 
20th century, vocabulary, punctuation, diachronic linguistics. 
 
Introduction 
 
The aim of this article is to test the methodological tools provided by TXM 
platform2 for research on dynamics of vocabulary and punctuation marks in 
diachronic corpora. The idea of this research was inspired by the concept of 
literary corpus proposed within Russian stylometric school by its leader Gregory 
Martynenko [1; 2]. The corpus is designed by its developers to become a testing 
ground for various text computation techniques; besides, it should allow 
studying changes that occur in the language at the crucial historical moments [3] 
(see below section The corpus and its sample). 
                                           
1 The reported study was funded by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research in the 
framework of research projects no. 17-29-09173 “The Russian language on the edge of radical 
historical changes: the study of language and style in prerevolutionary, revolutionary and post-
revolutionary artistic prose by the methods of mathematical and computer linguistics (a corpus-
based research on Russian short stories)” and no. 19-07-00806 “Research and development of 
methods and algorithms for complex linguistic analysis of special text corpora”. 
2 TXM is the full name of the software developed by the Textometry scientific project, see 
http://www.textometrie.org. 
70                 A.M. Lavrentiev, T.Yu. Sherstinova, A.M. Chepovskiy, B. Pincemin 
 
The aim of this research is to apply TXM textometric analysis to its 
subcorpus referring to Russian literature of 1901–1930. It should allow us to 
compare and enhance the obtained results with those that are gained by other 
computational techniques and software. Another aim is to check if the results of 
this analysis can help reveal trends in literary language and Russian literature on 
the whole and to evaluate if deeper and more precise analysis is worth 
undertaking. The method consists in examining correlations between the 
frequency of word forms, lemmas, punctuation marks, etc. and various external 
and properly literary factors. Among the external factors we consider first of all 
the important historical events, such as World War I (WWI), the October 
Revolution (OR) and the Civil War (CW) that followed it.  
Our basic hypothesis is that, despite the differences among individual texts, 
authors and styles, a general chronological evolution exists in the literary 
process and that some historical events cause changes in literary language that 
lead to formation of distinct periods. As a first step, in this article, we adopt an 
exploratory statistical approach [4], in order to discover from data which time 
divisions as well as which language features happen to be relevant, and thus 
provide hints for further confirmatory research. 
The methodology presented in this article may be used both for diachronic 
studies of literature and for various NLP tasks connected with texts processing 
and monitoring over time with the aim of revealing linguistic, stylistic and 
sentiment changes in texts influenced by some external factors such as historical 
events or cultural and intellectual trends. 
 
Methodology 
 
Information technologies for Corpus Linguistics 
 
Automated tools for natural language text processing are applied for such 
tasks as text classification, authorship attribution, discovering underlying rules 
of natural language, building and applying models of language structure (see for 
instance [5, 6, 7]). 
Corpus analysis software, such as TXM platform considered in this article, is 
necessary for statistical analysis of the vocabulary and for retrieval and 
comparison of various linguistic patterns. It allows the computation of statistical 
characteristics of such constructions and analysis of different parts of the corpus 
(subcorpora). As we have shown in [8; 9], the methods of corpus analysis may 
be applied to examine the possibility of uncovering various differentiating 
features for thematic text classification, as well as to create training dataset 
samples for natural language text recognition. 
The selection of differentiating features is a key problem for classification 
tasks [10] and for building correct training samples. The necessity to select a 
limited number of differentiating features is due to the problem of the training 
sample increase in size as the number of features grows. In order to estimate 
precisely enough, it is required that each feature used would occur at least 
Using TXM Platform for Research on Language Changes                        71 
 
several times, which is practically impossible, for instance, in the case where all 
known words of the Russian language are used as a set of features. When 
working with relatively short texts of different authors, in which considerable 
variation may be observed in the use of words and syntactic constructions, the 
selection of differentiating features is particularly important. This is why 
application of corpus analysis methods for pre-processing of training datasets is 
so topical. 
 
The corpus and its sample 
 
The Corpus of Russian Short Stories of the first third of the 20th century is 
currently being developed in St. Petersburg State University in cooperation with 
National Research University Higher School of Economics, St. Petersburg [3; 11; 
12]. It is intended for stylometric, linguistic and literary studies of the Russian 
prose of the 1900s–1930s. The main task of the corpus developers is to create a 
model of a literary corpus, which implies the inclusion in the corpus of texts of the 
maximum number of writers, who created their works in the corresponding era, — 
both well-known and peripheral. The other task is to create an empirical base for 
studying the language and style of Russian prose in synchrony and diachrony for a 
given time period, as well as for conducting stylometric analysis of literary texts 
on phonetic (rhythmic), lexical, syntactic, semantic and structural levels [3].  
The interest in this time period is determined by the fact that the first three 
decades of the 20th century were saturated by a series of acute social upheavals, 
which led to dramatic changes both in the language and in the style of fiction 
[ibid.]. Therefore, an important task of creating the corpus is quantitative 
analysis of linguistic and stylistic changes that have occurred in fiction as a 
result of social disasters. Particular attention is paid to the list of linguistic 
parameters which are planned for text data processing, such as frequency 
parameters (calculated for word forms, lemmas, parts of speech [13], syntactic 
structures [14], rhythmic patterns [15], text composition [16]) and structural 
parameters (word length, sentence length, paragraph length [17], text length, 
measures of syntactic complexity [18], the internal dynamics of the text, etc.). It 
should be noted that the texts originally published in old Russian spelling (prior 
to the reform of 1918) have been normalized according to modern spelling rules, 
for homogeneity considerations [19]. This is the general practice in Russian text 
editing, including scholarly editions, and in Russian text corpora [20. P. 36–37]. 
The proposed corpus model can be extrapolated to the creation of similar 
resources for other literary genres, journalism and other genres of texts, not only 
written, but also oral [11]. 
Our current research sample includes 308 texts (entire or samples). All of 
them belong to the “annotated” subcorpus of the project, the list of short stories 
for which is given in [3]. However, at this stage we did not use any pre-
annotation and only relied on the NLP tools provided by TXM. For each text, 
the author’s name and the year of publication are available as metadata. Most of 
the 298 authors are represented by one text (one author has three texts in the 
72                 A.M. Lavrentiev, T.Yu. Sherstinova, A.M. Chepovskiy, B. Pincemin 
 
sample, and nine have two texts). Among the authors one can find both major 
writers (such as Bunin or Gorky) and persons that are practically unknown to the 
general public.  
A diagram of distribution of texts according to their size is shown in Fig. 1. 
Each text is represented by a bar, texts are ordered by descending size, and the 
length of the bar corresponds to the number of words. Most of them are between 
1,800 and 5,000 words long, but some texts are as short as 500 words or as long 
as 15,000 words or more. We keep this length diversity because it is inherent to 
real data we want to observe. We deal with it, on the one hand, by grouping 
texts into years, which smoothes singularities, and, on the other hand, by 
choosing statistical methods that take into account size variation. 
At the year level, each year is represented by several texts, and for most 
years the number of words ranges from 20,000 to 40,000. The corpus is 
therefore not perfectly balanced but it seems to be representative enough to 
study the evolution of short stories language and style over the selected period 
of time. The genre of short stories was chosen precisely because it allows 
collecting a relatively big amount of texts all over the period under consideration 
and in most cases does not require sampling. 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Distribution of texts according to their size in words: texts are ordered  
by descending size, and each bar stands for a text 
 
The first third of the 20th century is a particularly interesting period in the 
history of Russian literature, as it starts with the “Silver Age” of Russian poetry 
and numerous innovations in the method and style of writing, goes through such 
dramatic socio-political events as WWI, the revolutions of 1917, and the CW, 
and ends in the 1930s, when “socialist realism” became dominant under the 
pressure of communist ideology. 
 
TXM platform 
 
To analyze the corpus we used free and open-source TXM software platform 
[21, 22]. It represents the latest generation of software developed by the 
Using TXM Platform for Research on Language Changes                        73 
 
international community of Textual Data Analysis, also known as Textometry. 
TXM is distributed in the form of a software application for all major operating 
systems (Linux, Windows and Mac OS) and as a GWT-based [23] application 
for a web server. The platform provides a wide range of tools for corpus 
creation, annotation, analysis and publication. It can import source texts from 
clipboard, simple text files (UTF-8 or other encoding), Microsoft Word and 
LibreOffice Writer documents, XML-tagged texts (in particular TEI XML) and 
some proprietary formats of corpus processing software (Alceste, Hyberbase). 
Metadata can be provided in a separate spreadsheet (CSV, XLSX or ODS). 
TreeTagger, available as an extension, may be used for automatic 
morphosyntactic tagging and lemmatisation [24].  
Once the corpus is imported to TXM, further annotation of word properties, 
structural units or reference chains may be performed. TXM uses CQP [25] as a 
search engine for making frequency lists and advanced KWIC concordances, 
and R [26] for statistical analysis. Hyperlinks that exist between different TXM 
objects allow the user to move smoothly from quantitative tools (such as 
frequency lists) to qualitative interpretation (using concordances or browsing the 
full text). Subcorpora and partitions may be created in different modes for 
contrastive analysis. In this research, we used two statistical tools provided by 
TXM — correspondence (factor) analysis and specificity. 
Correspondence analysis (CA) [27; 28] is widely used in the textual data 
analysis community [29; 30]. Papers using CA are regularly presented at the 
JADT Textual Data Statistical Analysis conference [31]. Compared to other 
multi-dimensional analysis methods (such as principal components), it is 
specially designed for contingency tables, for instance, those crossing texts and 
words [32; 33]. It may be applied to word forms, lemmas or part-of-speech tags 
of the corpus. In the field of textual data analysis, CA is almost entirely devoted 
to produce overviews through visualization of 2D factorial maps (and 
experimentation of 3D ones). The summary-oriented use is also based on 
information compression (selection of the first dimensions) and noise reduction 
(elimination of the last dimensions). Such a holistic approach is even required in 
case of the Guttman effect [34] on serially-structured corpora [35]. 
The specificity score [36; 32. P. 130–136] is a non-parametric statistical test 
that helps evaluate the significance of the frequency of a word (or pattern) in a 
part of a corpus. For instance, the verb kazat’sia ‘to seem’ which counts 499 
occurrences in 1901–1013 (in 942 occurrences for the whole corpus) is scored 
with a 25.7 specificity, which is much higher than the significance threshold of 
3. The specificity score is similar to such widely used keyword tests as chi-
square, log-likelihood or t-score, but it has the advantage of modeling precisely 
the distribution of a discrete population (in mathematical sense) and thus allows 
understanding precisely the deviation it measures. The other statistical models 
quoted above use distribution hypotheses (approximations) that allow evaluating 
deviations, while specificity implements a Fisher’s exact test [37]. It is generally 
admitted to be theoretically superior, but the other tests are still used for 
practical reasons (approximation tests were implemented in popular software 
74                 A.M. Lavrentiev, T.Yu. Sherstinova, A.M. Chepovskiy, B. Pincemin 
 
when the processing power of available computer was much lower than now) 
[38; 33. P. 122]. 
Both CA and specificity score can be applied to data that present some 
internal size variation: methods align with real data, rather than data align with 
methods. Actually, part sizes in the corpus must not be normalized, because this 
would distort the statistical model which takes into account raw frequencies. 
However, it is important to be aware of these variations to draw accurate 
interpretations from statistical results. 
All the results provided by TXM can be exported in CSV tables and/or SVG 
graphic files. 
In addition to the tools available through the user interface, it is possible to 
use the ones provided with TXM or produce new Groovy scripts and macros. 
TXM is efficient on medium size corpora (up to 10 million words 
approximately) but can be customized for working with hundreds million words. 
The corpus under consideration was imported into TXM (0.7.9 version, using 
the XTZ+CSV module), and TreeTagger was applied to annotate every word 
with a morphological tag and lemma, punctuation marks were tagged as well. 
We used the parameter file for Russian provided on the TreeTagger website, 
trained on a corpus by Serge Sharoff [39]. 
 
Results and Discussion 
 
Correspondence analysis 
 
First, we built a partition of the corpus based on the year of publication. In 
this partition, each year is a subcorpus that can be compared to the other 
subcorpora and to the corpus as a whole. As already mentioned, the corpus is 
relatively balanced in this respect (20,000 to 40,000 words per year). However, 
some years are over-represented (1927: 65,591 words, 1916: 60,630 words, 
1928: 59,247 words). One year is particularly under-represented (1920: 9,749 
words), and another year is totally absent (1905). We have been particularly 
attentive to the bias that this imbalance might create in the analysis.  
A CA was performed on the dataset (lexical table) of the 200 most frequent 
lemmas and punctuation marks. Such an approach allows us to focus on function 
words and the most common content words, and to minimize the effect of proper 
nouns and other words that are highly specific to a particular text or an author. 
Punctuation marks are analyzed in the same way as words. In our opinion, they 
can bear information on syntactic complexity and individual author’s style. 
However, we also check what influence the punctuation and proper nouns have 
on the CA and whether the results on proximity of corpus parts hold if these 
categories are excluded. 
The results of the CA are presented in a factorial map (Fig. 2). The axes on 
the map represent the first two dimensions obtained as a result of information 
compression. It should be noted that TXM also allows displaying the third 
dimension instead of the first or the second one. The first dimension is 
Using TXM Platform for Research on Language Changes                        75 
 
mathematically designed as the 1-D best representation of data (maximization of 
inertia). The second dimension is mathematically designed as to orthogonally 
complete the first one to provide the 2-D best representation of data, and so on. 
Thus, dimensions have no given name (they are named by their rank) but, after 
examination of the analysis results and indicators, they may be interpreted 
relatively to initial data. Axes cross at the center of gravity of the data cloud. 
The percentage provided for each axis indicates its weight in the inertia 
(variance) of the whole corpus: in Figure 2 for instance, the two first axes of the 
28-dimension space1 capture one third (20.07 % + 13.91 % = 33.98 %) of the 
total variation information of the corpus. The direction of axes has no particular 
meaning: a horizontal or vertical flip of the chart has no effect on their 
interpretation. Only the positions of points relative to each other count.  
What is special with CA is that both categorical variables that are crossed in 
the data table are represented in the same geometrical space. In Figure 2, both 
the 29 years (parts of the corpus) and the 200 most frequent lemmas are 
displayed. The chart is hardly readable, as many of the 230 labels overlap. TXM 
users can zoom in and out the charts, and click on the labels to get more 
information but this is impossible in print. Therefore, one can choose, as in 
Figure 3, to display only one of the two sets, in order to focus on this set and to 
improve the readability of the chart. The coordinates of the years are the same in 
Figures 2 and 3. Yet the relationship with the other set can still be useful to 
complete the interpretation of the axes: the reading of the chart must be 
controlled by full statistic information provided along with the graphical result. 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. CA factorial map of years crossed with the 200 most frequent lemmas 
                                           
1 The dimensionality of the space is given by the formula: Min (Row Number, Column 
Number) -1. Here: Min (200, 29) -1 = 28. 
76                 A.M. Lavrentiev, T.Yu. Sherstinova, A.M. Chepovskiy, B. Pincemin 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. CA factorial map of years crossed with the 200 most frequent lemmas  
(only years plotted) 
 
Focusing our analysis on years, a chronological distribution appears very 
clearly on Axis 1, although it is not linear. Most of years before 1917 are located 
on the right-hand side of the chart and most of years after 1918 are located on 
the left-hand side. Only one post-revolutionary year (1918) is located on the 
right-hand side (close to the center), and two pre-revolutionary years (1910 and 
1913) are found in the left-hand zone. The year 1917 has a marked position in 
the “post-revolutionary” camp. These exceptions should be studied in more 
detail but they do not compromise the general trend, that is the deep impact of 
the 1917 revolution on the core vocabulary of Russian literature. 
Our second hypothesis, that is the influence of WWI and the CW on the core 
vocabulary of the corpus as opposed to peacetime, does not seem to be 
confirmed by this analysis. In order to test more specifically if significant 
differences exist between war and peaceful time periods, we built a four part 
partition: pre-revolutionary peace (1901–1913), WWI (1914–1916), OR and 
CW (1917–1922), and post-revolutionary peace time (1923–1930). 
The CA of the 200 most frequent lemmas (Fig. 4) shows a very strong 
opposition of pre- and post-revolutionary periods on Axis 1, which is also 
characterized by a high inertia (73%).  
The position of these periods on Axis 1 is strictly chronological: the “war” 
periods are situated between the “peaceful” ones. With Axis 2 (14.07% of 
inertia), instead of a Guttman horseshoe pattern, we observe that the strongest 
polarization is observed between the two “war” periods. Then the opposition 
between war and peace appears on Axis 3 of the CA (9.9% of inertia) but this is 
nothing but an artifact created by corpus organization (four parts of comparable 
Using TXM Platform for Research on Language Changes                        77 
 
size) and by the orthogonality of axes imposed by the calculation. So the only 
conclusion we can draw is that the frequencies of words and punctuation marks 
follow an overall chronological trend and that there is a major gap between the 
subcorpora of 1914–1916 and 1917–1922. 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. CA factorial map of the table crossing four periods x 200 most frequent lemmas 
(punctuation and proper nouns included) 
 
We can now have a deeper look into the data thanks to the table of indicators 
that TXM provides along with the CA charts. We can see there which rows 
(lemmas in our case) contribute the most to the organization of the factorial map 
on Axis 1. The contribution of an item to an axis is measured by the portion that 
the item brings to the inertia of the axis. 
The strongest contributions are those of punctuation marks (full stop, dash 
and semicolon), the noun tovarisch ‘comrade’ associated with the post-
revolutionary period, the third-person pronouns on ‘he’ and ona ‘she’, the 
conjunction i ‘and’, and the proper name Ivan associated with the pre-
revolutionary period. The exact figures are given in Table 1, where the first 
column is the lemma, the fourth is its mass in the corpus, the fifth is the 
contribution to Axis 1 (sorted descending) and the sixth is the coordinate on the 
axis (negative for the post-revolutionary period and positive for the pre-
revolutionary one). 
One might argue that punctuation marks may be altered by editing practices 
and that proper nouns depend on individual texts, so that they should not be 
taken into account to study general trends in the evolution of literature. TXM 
allows us to dynamically edit the lexical table on which CA is based. However, 
78                 A.M. Lavrentiev, T.Yu. Sherstinova, A.M. Chepovskiy, B. Pincemin 
 
if we exclude punctuation and proper nouns, the configuration of the factorial 
map does not change: chronological distribution remains dominant on Axis 1 
(Fig. 5). So, this test provides an additional confirmation to our basic hypothesis. 
 
T a b l e  1 
Lemmas and punctuation marks with the strongest contribution  
to the CA by periods, Axis 1 
 
Lemma 
Translit. 
Gloss 
Mass1 
Cont12 
c13 
. 
. 
. 
9.86 
19.75 
-0.12 
она 
ona 
she 
1.12 
8.16 
+0.23 
и 
i 
and 
5.74 
5.59 
+0.09 
- 
- 
- 
5.37 
4.2 
-0.08 
: 
: 
: 
1.13 
3.82 
-0.16 
он 
on 
he 
2.21 
3.66 
+0.11 
иван 
Ivan 
Ivan 
0.08 
3.64 
+0.58 
который 
kotoryj 
which 
0.31 
2.56 
+0.25 
товарищ 
tovarisch 
comrade 
0.09 
2.44 
-0.46 
на 
na 
on 
2.19 
2.4 
-0.09 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. CA factorial map of the table crossing four periods x 200 most frequent lemmas 
(punctuation and proper nouns excluded) 
                                           
1 The mass of an item is the portion of its occurrences. For instance, the first line of this 
table indicates that 9.86 % of occurrences of the 200 most frequent lemmas are dots. 
2 Cont1 is contribution to Axis 1, that is the portion of inertia that the item brings to the 
total inertia of the axis. For instance, dots represent nearly one-fifth of Axis 1 inertia. 
3 C1 stands for the coordinate on Axis 1. Opposite signs (“+” or “-”) indicate antinomical 
roles along the dimension. 
Using TXM Platform for Research on Language Changes                        79 
 
A sharp distribution of subcorpora based on chronological criterion as a 
result of CA is perfectly visible in Fig. 4 and 5. This distribution indicates the 
possibility of chronological text classification. Such a corpus may, for instance, 
be used as a training dataset for identification of literary texts in the Russian 
language. An unknown Russian literary text might then be identified as 
belonging to a particular time span by using various classifiers with the help of 
third-party computing routines. 
The selection of differentiating features requires further research using CA as 
well other methods. The results presented in Fig. 4 and 5 show that 200 most 
frequent lemmas (with or without punctuation and proper nouns) may be used 
for such a selection. A more detailed CA including morphological types 
(building the datasets for analysis for different parts of speech) will allow us in 
the future to determine the precise differentiating features responsible for the 
distribution of subcorpora observed in Fig. 2 to 5. 
For literary texts, individual parts of speech, as well as different sets, such as 
nouns and adjectives, nouns, adjectives and verbs, noun phrases, verb phrases, 
may be used as differentiating features in addition to the general set of lemmas. 
Selecting different morphological features may have a considerable impact on 
the thematic classification. The research results provided above show that 
precise recommendations for discovering the characteristic features of individual 
subcorpora may be formulated in the future work. 
 
Cluster analysis 
 
Another way to investigate and precise the organization among years is to 
run a cluster analysis over the 29 years. Instead of considering the full data table, 
we benefit from CA and extract the five first dimensions of our first CA (Fig. 2 
and 3): thus we get a more complete representation of the data than in the 
factorial map, with 56 % of the total variance (instead of 34 %), and still gain an 
efficient noise reduction. TXM implements an agglomerative hierarchical 
clustering with Ward criterion (minimum variance clustering). Fig. 6 displays 
the full hierarchical dendrogram on the 29 years. The two main branches out of 
three still clearly split years before 1916 and years from 1917 onwards, with a 
few singularities (1906, 1910, 1913 standing closer to late years, and 1918 
associated with early years). As the CA was based on frequent lemmas, this 
global structure confirms that a major overall lexical turn happens around 1917. 
 
Specificity 
 
Specificity test may be used as a complement to CA in order to determine 
what elements (for instance, lemmas) are the most characteristic of each 
subcorpus and explain the variation observed in CA. As a first step, we built a 
general specificity table based on the 200 most frequent lemmas (including 
punctuation marks) in the partition by period (the same dataset as for the CA in 
the previous section). For the record, most of these high frequency lemmas are 
80                 A.M. Lavrentiev, T.Yu. Sherstinova, A.M. Chepovskiy, B. Pincemin 
 
function words, very common content words and punctuation marks. This 
appears to be relevant in characterizing a deep language evolution, as, with such 
high frequencies, we minimize the effect of proper nouns or more topical words 
that could be associated with a particular text or an author.  
 
 
 
Fig. 6. Ward clustering of the 29 years represented by their five first coordinates  
in the CA space built from the 200 most frequent lemmas 
 
As a second step, we analyzed 10 most specific lemmas for each period 
obtained from the statistical test, and built a bar chart displaying the score of 
these lemmas in all the parts.  
The specificity score indicates the probability that the number of occurrences 
in a given part of a corpus would be so high or so low in case of random 
distribution of words in the corpus. It corresponds to the absolute value of the 
base 10 logarithm of the probability. By convention, a positive score indicates 
over-representation and a negative score indicates under-representation of the 
element in the subcorpus. In other words, the score of 25.7 for the verb kazat’sia 
‘to seem’ in the period 1901–1913 indicates that there is one chance in 1025.7 
that it would occur so many times in this part of the corpus randomly. The 
scores between -2 and +2 (≥1 % probability) are considered as “banal” (non-
significant). In a few cases the probability may be so low that it exceeds the 
possibilities of computing, so a conventional limit has to be set to the maximum 
score. By default, the maximum score is set to 1,000 in TXM, but, for the sake 
of readability of bar charts (with lower but significant scores), a lower limit may 
be set. In this research, the specificity scores were capped at 30. 
Using TXM Platform for Research on Language Changes                        81 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. Ten most specific lemmas of Period 1 (1901–1913) 
 
 
 
Fig. 8. Ten most specific lemmas of Period 4 (1923–1930) 
 
We first compare the most specific words in the opposite periods: 1901–1913 
(Fig. 7) and 1923–1930 (Fig. 8). It appears quite vividly that the most specific 
words of one period are generally the most unspecific of the other, and vice 
versa. For instance, the score of the relative pronoun kotoryi is +23.9 in the first 
period and -27.1 in the last one. 
The only exception is the ellipsis mark (…) which is highly specific in 1901–
1913 and banal in 1923–1930. It is highly unspecific in 1917–1922. The 
intermediate periods generally display the same specificity polarity as the 
corresponding “extremes” with generally a lower score. This is another evidence 
of the chronological distribution of periods observed on Axis 1 of the CA. 
The same tendency is confirmed when we look at the most specific words of 
the intermediate periods (Fig. 9 and 10), that is that the main distinction lies at 
the 1916/1917 border and that the specificity is greater in the extreme periods. 
This can be illustrated by two examples: the name Ivan (the third most specific 
lemma in the period 1914–1916) and the semi-colon (the fourth most specific 
lemma in the 1917–1922 period). Their scores are presented in Table 2. 
82                 A.M. Lavrentiev, T.Yu. Sherstinova, A.M. Chepovskiy, B. Pincemin 
 
T a b l e  2 
Specificity scores for Ivan and semi-colon 
 
Lemma 
1901–1913 
1914–1916 
1917–1922 
1923–1930 
Иван 
+24.6 
+13.6 
–10.0 
< –30.0 
: 
< –30.0 
–3.3 
+13.0 
+25.9 
 
 
 
Fig. 9. Ten most specific lemmas of Period 2 (1914–1916) 
 
 
 
Fig. 10. Ten most specific lemmas of Period 3 (1917–1922) 
 
However, some lemmas stand out in one of the intermediate periods. For 
instance otec ‘father’ has the score +14.1 in 1914–1916, its score being negative 
or banal in all the other periods. The same kind of phenomenon occurs with the 
predicative adverb nado ‘must’ in 1917–1922 (score +8.4). It is banal or 
unspecific in the other periods. 
For such words that do not seem to follow the general chronological trend, it 
is necessary to check if their specificity is not due to some individual texts rather 
than to a period as a whole. For that purpose, we made a partition of 
chronologically ordered individual texts and examined a bar chart of every 
word. For otec (Fig. 11) we see that this word is highly specific to some individ-
ual texts (score > +10 in six texts out of 308), and four of these texts are located 
Using TXM Platform for Research on Language Changes                        83 
 
in the 1914–1916 period, while in the other texts of the same period the score 
lies within the banality zone. In the short story “Tayna” (‘Mystery’) by Alexey 
Dementiev written in 1915, the main characters are otec diakon (‘father deacon’) 
and otec Mikhail (‘father Mikhail’), where the word otec is used as a religious 
title, which explains its extremely high specificity score (over +30). It cannot 
therefore be considered to be characteristic of the whole period. 
 
 
 
Fig. 11. Specificity bar chart for otec in individual texts (chronologically ordered partition)1 
 
The situation is quite different for the word nado (Fig. 12). The score is 
superior to +5 in only one text (“Mladency gor” ‘Babies of the mountains’ by 
Gleb Pushkarev, 1922), but there clearly is a slight over-representation in the 
1917–1922 period: eight out of 12 texts with the score >2.1 and six out of seven 
texts with the score >3 are located in this period. 
 
 
 
Fig. 12. Specificity bar chart for nado in individual texts (chronologically ordered partition) 
 
                                           
1 The score axis notes the specificity value (a score of 10 in a text means that, if words 
were randomly spread, there would be less than one chance in 10,000,000,000 (1010) that this 
word would have such a relatively high frequency). So tall bars flag texts in which otec occurs 
with a frequency much higher than expected. Tall negative bars (directed downwards) flag 
statistically significant underuse of this word. 
84                 A.M. Lavrentiev, T.Yu. Sherstinova, A.M. Chepovskiy, B. Pincemin 
 
Progression 
 
In order to locate more precisely the time point after which the frequency of a 
certain word increases or decreases considerably, we can use the Progression tool 
provided by TXM. It builds a chart where a “cumulative” curve is drawn for one 
or more search patterns expressed by a CQL query. The curve goes rightward with 
every word of the corpus and moves one step up at each occurrence of the pattern. 
If the number of occurrences is low, the “steps” of the curve are visible. If the 
pattern occurs regularly, the slope of the curb indicates the relative frequency. 
Thus, no normalization transformation is needed, as the slope directly measures 
and visually shows the ratio of occurrence count to textual length, which is a 
normalized value. Word frequencies may differ; however, word slopes can be 
straight compared throughout texts with various lengths. 
We built a progression chart for two lemmas, dusha ‘soul’ and tovarisch 
‘comrade’ that appeared among the specific words of the pre- and post-
revolutionary periods respectively (Fig. 13). Vertical lines show the limits of 
years in the corpus. It should be noted that within a year the texts are arranged in 
the alphabetical order of the authors, so the progression is not strictly 
chronological. 
Both words are used all over the corpus, but for each of them we observe a 
significant change in frequency at a certain time point. To make this change 
more obvious, we drew straight dotted lines before and after the turning point 
for each word. For tovarisch, the frequency increases in 1917 and remains stable 
afterwards, while dusha is used steadily up to 1922, and its frequency decreases 
afterwards. 
 
 
 
Fig. 13. Cumulative progression chart for the lemmas dusha ‘soul’ and tovarisch ‘comrade’. 
The occurrences of the search terms are represented by curves. Dotted lines are drawn  
to visualize the average slope before and after the change in frequency 
 
This observation is confirmed by a simple measure of relative frequency 
presented in Table 3. In mathematical sense, this corresponds exactly to the 
Using TXM Platform for Research on Language Changes                        85 
 
slope of the straight lines in Fig. 13. From a statistical point of view, we can 
compute the corresponding specificity scores, to assess significance: for dusha, 
the over-representation in the first period amounts to 19 (that is, less than one 
chance in 1019); for tovarisch, the specificity score reaches a value of 35. 
 
T a b l e  3 
Relative frequency (per 10,000) of the words dusha ‘soul’ and tovarisch ‘comrade’ 
 
Lemma 
dusha 
tovarisch 
Period 
1901–1922 
1923–1930 
1901–1916 
1917–1930 
Frequency 
6.9 
3.1 
2.8 
7.4 
Specificity 
score 
+19 
-19 
-35 
+35 
 
Conclusion 
 
The results of this pilot study show the efficacy of TXM application for 
research on language dynamics and confirm our basic hypothesis that there is a 
chronological trend in the evolution of the core vocabulary of Russian short 
stories. The 1917 revolution represents a major event that divides the corpus into 
two distinct periods. The influence of WWI and the CW as opposed to 
peacetime is less evident, or at least the tests we used did not allow us to find 
evidence of lexical opposition of war and peace periods.  
An interesting result is that punctuation plays an important role in the 
organization of the research data. The full stop is highly specific for the post-
revolutionary period. This may indicate that sentences became shorter since 
1917, but this observation needs to be verified by a more precise syntactic 
analysis. However, the chronological trend remains dominant even if the 
punctuation marks and proper nouns are excluded from the counts. 
As we look at the specificity and relative frequency of individual words, we 
can observe that some of them are highly specific to a particular period (e.g. 
nado ‘must’ in 1917–1923) or to a small group of individual texts (e.g. otec 
‘father’ for six texts out of 308), others demonstrate a dramatic change in 
relative frequency at a certain time point. 
In our opinion, these preliminary observations show that textometric tools 
provided by TXM may be powerful and insightful in corpus analysis. Further 
research may be conducted in several directions. Firstly, we can apply additional 
NLP tools, such as stemming, detection of noun and verb phrases, and verify 
whether the trends observed on lemmas appear more sharply when the statistics 
is calculated on their output. Analysis of morphological tags may reveal 
completely new trends, such as the more or less “orality” features of the texts 
and/or the expression of nominal vs. verbal dominance, which appears to be a 
general deep trend in text statistics [40; 41 P. 147–148]. A more precise external 
description of the texts, such as sociolinguistic data on the authors, may also 
prove to be an insightful direction in the exploration of literary texts. For 
example, this may include the membership of the author in a particular literary 
86                 A.M. Lavrentiev, T.Yu. Sherstinova, A.M. Chepovskiy, B. Pincemin 
 
group such as “futurists” or “Oberiuts”, certain sociological characteristics of 
the writers (sex, age, social background, education, profession, etc.) and their 
biography features [42], story topics [43] and type of the narrative [44], 
individual stylistic features of some authors [45], etc. Finally, other genres and 
text types can be added to the corpus in order to widen the part of the language it 
represents. 
The results of our research show that the tools provided by the TXM 
platform are efficient for analysis of the Russian text corpus in the framework of 
computational linguistics. The proposed methodology may be used for various 
applied tasks when it is necessary to reveal language changes under the 
influence of some external factors or events. 
 
References 
 
1. Martynenko, G.Ya. (1988) Osnovy stilemetrii [The Foundation of Stylometics]. 
St. Petersburg: St. Petersburg State University. 
2. Martynenko, G.Ya. (2019) Metody matematicheskoy lingvistiki v stilisticheskikh issle-
dovaniyakh [Methods of mathematical linguistics in stylistic studies]. St. Petersburg: Nestor-
Istoriya. 
3. Martynenko, G. & Sherstinova, T. (2020) Linguistic and Stylistic Parameters for the 
Study of Literary Language in the Corpus of Russian Short Stories of the First Third of the 
20th Century. In: R. Piotrowski's Readings in Language Engineering and Applied Linguistics, 
Proceedings of the III International Conference on Language Engineering and Applied 
Linguistics (PRLEAL-2019). Saint Petersburg, Russia. November 27, 2019. CEUR Workshop 
Proceedings. Vol. 2552. pp. 105–120. [Online] Available from: http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-
2552/Paper10.pdf. 
4. Tukey, J.W. (1980) We Need Both Exploratory and Confirmatory. The American 
Statistician. 34 (1). pp. 23–25. 
5. Lüdeling, A. & Kytö, M. (ed.) (2009) Corpus linguistics: an international handbook. 
Vol. 2. Berlin; New York: W. de Gruyter. 
6. Osipov, G.S. (2011) Metodi iskusstvennogo intellekta [Methods of Artificial 
Intelligence]. Moscow: Fizmatlit. 
7. Chepovskiy, A.M. (2015). Informatsionnyye modeli v zadachakh obrabotki tekstov na 
estestvennykh yazykakh [Information Models for the Problems of Natural Text Processing]. 
2nd ed. Moscow: Natsional’nyy otkrytyy universitet “INTUIT”. 
8. Lavrentiev, A.M. et al. (2018) A new toolkit for natural text processing with the TXM 
platform and its application to a corpus for analysis of texts propagating extremist views. 
Vestnik  NSU. Series: Linguistics and Intercultural Communication. 16 (3). pp. 19–31. (In 
Russian). DOI: 10.25205/1818-7935-2018-16-3-19-31 
9. Lavrentiev, A.M. et al. (2018) Creating text corpora for special purposes on the basis of 
extended TXM platform. Sistemy vysokoy dostupnosti. 14 (3). pp. 76–81. (In Russian). DOI: 
10.18127/j20729472-201803-13 
10. Polyakov, I.V. et al. (2015) The problem of text classification and differentiating 
features. Vestnik NSU. Series: Information Technologies. 13 (2). pp. 55–63. (In Russian).  
11. Martynenko, G.Ya. & Sherstinova, T.Yu. (2020) Corpus of Russian Short Stories of 
the First Third of the 20th Century: Theoretical Issues and Linguistic Parameters. Structural 
and Applied Linguistics. 14. (In Russian). (in print). 
12. Martynenko, G. et al. (2018) On the principles of creation of the Russian short stories 
corpus of the first third of the 20th century. Proceedings of the XV International Conference 
on Computer and Cognitive Linguistics ʻTEL 2018ʼ. Kazan. pp. 180–197. (In Russian).  
Using TXM Platform for Research on Language Changes                        87 
 
13. Sherstinova, T. et al. (2020) Frequency Word Lists and Their Variability (the Case of 
Russian Fiction in 1900–1930). Proceedings of the 27th Conference of Open Innovations 
Association FRUCT. Trento: University of Trento, Italy. (in print). 
14. Martynenko, G. & Sherstinova, T. (2019) Symmetrics of syntactic figures in fiction: 
the case of Russian short stories of the 20th century. Computer Linguistics and Computing 
Ontologies. 3. pp. 116–123. DOI: 10.17586/2541-9781-2019-3-116-123 
15. Kazartsev, E., Davydova, A. & Sherstinova, T. (2020) Rhythmic Structures of Russian 
Prose and Occasional Iambs (a Diachronic Case Study). Proceedings of the 22nd 
International Conference on Speech and Computer – SpeCom 2020, St. Petersbug, LNCS 
(LNAI). Springer International Publishing. (in print). 
16. Sherstinova, T. & Skrebtsova, T. (2020) Russian Literature around the October 
Revolution: A Quantitative Exploratory Study of Literary Themes and Narrative Structure in 
Russian Short Stories of 1900–1930. In: Proceedings of the International Workshop 
“Computational Linguistics” – CompLing-2020. St. Petersburg. (in print). 
17. Martynenko, G. & Sherstinova, T. (2019) Analytical Distribution Model for Syntactic 
Variables Average Values in Russian literary Texts. Proceedings of the 4th International 
Conference Digital Transformation and Global Society DTGS-2019, St. Petersburg, Russia, 
June 19–21, 2019. Revised Selected Papers. Communications in Computer and Information 
Science. 1038. Springer International Publishing. pp. 719–731. 
18. Sherstinova, T., Ushakova, E. & Melnik, A. (2020) Measures of Syntactic Complexity 
and their Change over Time (the Case of Russian). Proceedings of the 27th Conference of 
Open Innovations Association FRUCT. Trento: University of Trento, Italy. (in print). 
19. Sherstinova, T. & Kirina, M. (2020) Data Normalization in the Corpus of Russian Short 
Stories: Spelling, Literary Themes and Biographical Description of Writers (under review). 
20. Savchuk, S. O. (2009) Korpus tekstov pervoy poloviny XX veka: tekuschee sostojanie i 
perspektivy [Text Corpus of the First Half of the 20th Century: Current State and Prospects]. In: 
Natsional’nyy korpus russkogo yazyka: 2006–2008. Novye rezul’taty i perspektivy [Russian 
National Corpus: 2006–2008. New Results and Prospects]. Saint Petersburg: Nestor-Istoriya. 
pp. 27–45. 
21. Heiden, S. (2010) The TXM Platform: Building Open-Source Textual Analysis 
Software Compatible with the TEI Encoding Scheme. In: Proceedings of the 24th Pacific 
Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation. Sendai, Japan. pp. 389–398. 
[Online] Available from: https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-00549764. 
22. TXM public website. [Online] Available from: http://textometrie.org. 
23. GWT Project website. [Online] Available from: http://www.gwtproject.org. 
24. Schmid, H. (1994) Probabilistic Part-of-Speech Tagging Using Decision Trees. 
Proceedings International Conference on New Methods in Language Processing, Manchester, 
UK, Sept. 1994. pp. 44–49. 
25. IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB). [Online] Available from: http://cwb.sourceforge.net. 
26. The R Project for Statistical Computing. [Online] Available from: https://www.r-
project.org. 
27. Benzécri, J.-P. et al. (1973) L’analyse des données. T. 2: L’analyse des 
Correspondances. Paris: Dunod. 
28. Husson, F., Lê, S. & Pagès, J. (2017) Exploratory Multivariate Analysis by Example 
Using R. 2nd ed. Boca Raton: Chapman and Hall/CRC. 
29. Léon, J. & Loiseau, S. (eds) (2016) History of Quantitative Linguistics in France. Lü-
denscheid: RAM-Verlag. 
30. Née, É. et al. (2017) Méthodes et Outils Informatiques pour l’Analyse des Discours. 
Rennes: Presses Universitaires. 
31. Lexicometrica website. [Online] Available from: http://jadt.org. 
32. Lebart, L., Salem, A. & Berry, L. (1998) Exploring Textual Data. Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Academic. 
88                 A.M. Lavrentiev, T.Yu. Sherstinova, A.M. Chepovskiy, B. Pincemin 
 
33. Lebart, L., Pincemin, B. & Poudat, C. (2019) Analyse des Données Textuelles. 
Québec: Presses de l’université du Québec. 
34. Guttman, L. (1941) The quantification of a class of attributes: A theory and method of a 
scale construction. In: The predicition of personal adjustment. New York: SSCR. pp. 251–264. 
35. Salem, A. (1991) Les séries textuelles chronologiques. Histoire et Mesure. 6 (1). 
pp. 149–175. 
36. Lafon, P. (1980) Sur la variabilité de la fréquence des formes dans un corpus. Mots. 
Les langages du politique. 1. pp. 127–165. 
37. Fisher, R.A. (1935) The Design of Experiments. Edinburg: Oliver and Boyd. 
38. McEnery, T. & Hardie, A. (2012) Corpus Linguistics: Method, Theory and Practice. 
Cambridge University Press. 
39. Sharoff, S. (2012) Russian statistical taggers and parsers. [Online] Available from: 
http://corpus.leeds.ac.uk/mocky. 
40. Biber, D. (2014) The ubiquitous oral versus literate dimension: A survey of 
multidimensional studies. In: Connor-Linton, J. & Amoroso, L.W. (eds) Measured language: 
Quantitative studies of acquisition, assessment, and variation, Washington DC: Georgetown 
University Press. pp. 1–20. 
41. Brunet, É. (2016). Tous comptes faits, Écrits choisis. T. 3: Questions linguistiques. 
Paris: Champion.  
42. Sherstinova, T.Yu. (2019) Biographical database of Russian writers (on the creation of a 
corpus of Russian narrative of the 20th century). Proceedings of the International Conference 
“Corpus Linguistics–2019”. St. Petersburg: St. Petersburg University. pp. 439–447. 
43. Sherstinova, T.Yu. & Skrebtsova, T.G. (2020) Russian Literature Around the October 
Revolution: A Quantitative Exploratory Study of Literary Themes and Narrative Structure in 
Russian Short Stories of 1900–1930. Proceedings of the International Conference DTGS-
2020. Digital Transformation and Global Society. 5th International Conference, DTGS 2020, 
St. Petersburg, Russia, 2020, Revised Selected Papers. Communications in Computer and 
Information Science. (in print). 
44. Skrebtsova, T.G. (2019) [Narrative structure of the Russian short story in the early 
20th century]. Proceedings of the International Conference “Corpus Linguistics – 2019”. 
St. Petersburg: St. Petersburg University. pp. 426–431. (In Russian). 
45. Martynenko, G.Ya. (2019) [Stylized syntactic triads in Russian short story of the first 
third of the 20th century]. Proceedings of the International Conference “Corpus Linguistics – 
2019”. St. Petersburg State University. pp. 395–404. (In Russian). 
 
А.М. Лаврентьев, Т.Ю. Шерстинова, А.М. Чеповский, Б. Пенсмен 
Использование платформы TXM для исследования изменений языка во времени: 
динамика словарного состава и пунктуации в русских литературных текстах 
Ключевые слова: стилеметрия, текстометрия, платформа TXM, корпусная лингвисти-
ка, русская литература XX века, словарный состав, пунктуация, диахроническая линг-
вистика. 
 
Цель настоящей статьи – испытать инструменты анализа, которые предоставляет 
платформа TXM для исследования динамики словарного состава и пунктуации в диа-
хронических корпусах текстов. TXM представляет собой комплекс программного обес-
печения для количественного и качественного анализа текстов, построенный на прин-
ципах прозрачной архитектуры и открытого кода. В статье демонстрируется, как можно 
использовать платформу для диахронического исследования текстов с учетом внешних 
факторов, оказывающих влияние на эволюцию языка. Исследование проводилось на 
Корпусе русских рассказов первой трети XX в. Корпус создавался независимо от TXM с 
целью отразить максимально широкий спектр произведений русских писателей и слу-
жить, таким образом, испытательной площадкой для различных методик математиче-
ского анализа текстов. Результаты этого пилотного исследования показывают эффек-
Using TXM Platform for Research on Language Changes                        89 
 
тивность использования TXM для исследования динамики развития языка и подтвер-
ждают явное влияние диахронического фактора на статистическое распределение тек-
стов изучаемого корпуса. Основными методами, использованными в статье, явились 
анализ соответствий и индекс специфичности, вычислявшиеся на различных разбивках 
корпуса (по годам, по периодам и индивидуально по текстам) на базе 200 самых ча-
стотных лемм (слов и знаков препинания). Использование базовой лексики (включаю-
щей служебные слова) и пунктуации позволяет сконцентрироваться на глубинных из-
менениях языка, абстрагируясь от индивидуальных стилистических факторов. В каче-
стве периодов были выделены: мирное время до революции (1901–1913), Первая миро-
вая война (1914–1916), революция и Гражданская война (1917–1922) и постреволюци-
онное мирное время (1923–1930). Относительная несбалансированность периодов и 
размеров отдельных текстов компенсируется методикой статистического анализа. 
В результате исследования было показано, что наиболее существенные изменения в 
употреблении базовой лексики и пунктуации происходят сразу после революционного 
1917 г. При анализе соответствий периоды располагаются строго в хронологическом 
порядке по первому измерению факторного плана. В то же время сопоставление перио-
дов не выявило четкого противопоставления по признаку мирное / военное время. Ана-
лиз специфичности позволил выявить характерные для каждого периода леммы, в том 
числе местоимения, служебные слова и знаки препинания, которые интуитивно не ас-
социируются с изменениями в языке рассматриваемой исторической эпохи. Например, 
местоимения третьего лица он и она характерны для периода до революции, а частот-
ность точки, тире и двоеточия повышается статистически значимым образом после 
1917 г. Представленная методика анализа в дальнейшем может использоваться как для 
диахронических исследований в литературоведении, так и для решения различных за-
дач автоматической обработки текста, направленных на выявление эволюции в лингви-
стических, стилистических и эмоциональных аспектах под влиянием каких-либо внеш-
них факторов. 
 
