Вестник Томского государственного университета. Филология. 2021. № 72 
 
 
UDC 81’33 
DOI: 10.17223/19986645/72/5 
 
Istvan Lenart1, Irina Yu. Markovina1, Orsolya Endrody2 
 
1 I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University (Moscow, Russian Federation) 
2 Eötvös Loránd University (Budapest, Hungary) 
E-mail: istvan.lenart@1msmu.ru, markovina_i_yu@staff.sechenov.mail.ru, 
endrody.orsolya@ppk.elte.hu 
 
Preschool Children’s Verbal Image of the World: A Cross-
Cultural Russian-Hungarian Comparison Based on Word Associ-
ations1 
 
This psycholinguistic-pedagogical interdisciplinary research investigates 4- to 5-year-old 
Russian and Hungarian preschool children’s linguistic image of the world. Applying the word 
association method, kindergarteners (N=100 in both countries) were asked to freely associate 
from 10 word-stimuli, then the results were contrasted. The research shed light on a similar 
perception of a family; of a friend; on the effects of globalization (Lego, Trudi, tablet); and on 
lacunas (devil and angel). 
Keywords: association experiment, linguistic consciousness, early childhood, psycholin-
guistics, cross-cultural communication 
 
1. Introduction 
 
This study investigated preschool children’s verbal image of the world from a 
Russian-Hungarian cross-cultural perspective. The approach merged perspectives of 
psycholinguistics, linguistics, and pedagogy. The methodology is based on the psy-
cholinguistic theory of linguistic consciousness deeply rooted in Vygotsky’s cultur-
al-historical psychology [1, 2], A.N. Leontiev’s psychological theory of activity, and 
the theory of speech activity by A.A. Leontiev [3–6]. The key research method to 
collect the linguistic data was an association test also referred to as an association 
experiment [7, 8]. The authors modified the method to better adjust it to the target 
group of respondents. The shoulder-to-shoulder method [9] was used while collect-
ing the data, and the results were analysed using the psycholinguistic theory of lin-
guistic consciousness and methods of corpus linguistics [10]. 
The major contribution of the pedagogical perspective was to characterise the 
age group chosen and select the stimulus words for the association test. When 
compiling the list of word-stimuli, the authors relied on describing and under-
standing childhood from the children’s perspective. Early childhood experts em-
phasise that children must be regarded as ‘actors’ determining their own life [11]. 
In order to correctly analyse the data obtained, it was important to remember that 
                                         
1 The reported study was funded by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, project 
number 18-512-23004. 
92                            Istvan Lenart, Irina Yu. Markovina, Orsolya Endrody 
 
learning begins with birth, and 4- to 5-year-old children have a vast knowledge 
of the world around and of their own selves. 
The research objective was to reveal and analyse similarities and differences 
in 4- to 5-year-old children’s linguistic consciousness across cultures, in the 
Russian-Hungarian context. Apart from the cross-cultural approach, the research 
is a part of a longer series of studies in which the 10- to 12-year-old age group 
will be investigated with the same methodology, allowing the researchers to dia-
chronically contrast the 4- to 5-year-old age group, with the 10- to 12-year-old 
age group and the adult language users; the latter by using existing associative 
dictionaries.  
In the course of the research, the authors aimed at gaining an insight into the 
linguistic consciousness (the psycholinguistic equivalent for image of the world) 
of Russian and Hungarian preschool children. The aim of cross-cultural research 
typically is to promote better understanding between potential dialogue partners 
by demonstrating common and culture-specific characteristics of the image of 
the world of people speaking different languages. In order to achieve this, the 
authors started investigating 4- to 5-year-old children as respondents. Thus, two 
possible Russian and Hungarian childhood narratives were compared based on 
the fact that childhood as an abstract concept varies within different societies 
and cultural groups [12, 13, 14]. 
In order to map and compare the linguistic consciousness of Russian and Hun-
garian preschool children, the association experiment was selected as the most 
appropriate and easy-to-use research method. Each participating respondent group 
included 100 children aged 4 to 5. Ten concepts were investigated: friend, child, 
family, water, black, toy/game, devil, home/house, foreigner, and angel. Two lists 
of stimulus words in both languages were compiled based on the concepts select-
ed. In this article, key findings of the research are presented, and the selection 
method is discussed in detail in Section 3. 
 
2. Psycholinguistic approach to linguistic consciousness 
 
2.1.1. Definitions of linguistic consciousness 
 
As already mentioned, the present research is based on the psycholinguistic theo-
ry of linguistic consciousness. Even though the phenomenon of linguistic con-
sciousness has been widely discussed and investigated by Russian psychologists, 
linguists and psycholinguists [1–7, 15–18], there is still no agreed definition. 
There have been a number of approaches. For instance, Shcherba applied the 
term to refer to individual psychophysiological verbal organization [15], where 
linguistic consciousness referred to an individual language system as opposed to 
the language of the community. 
Ushakova emphasised the difficulties in interpreting the term linguistic con-
sciousness, focusing on the two underlying phenomena: the mental and the material. 
The mental phenomenon is of a non-material nature, it cannot be measured, seen, or 
heard; whereas the material phenomenon implies speech that can be produced or 
Preschool children’s verbal image of the world                                    93 
 
 
recorded and the physiological process of building verbal links [16]. Even though 
the author admits the polysemy of the term, she believes that the key idea is that it 
refers to consciousness expressed verbally. In other words, the term illustrates the 
transition from a mental phenomenon into a material one [16]. 
Ufimtseva stresses that the concept of linguistic consciousness used for stud-
ying or modelling the linguistic picture of the world is synonymous with the 
psychological concept of “the image of the world” [6]. 
Based on Alexey N. Leontiev’s psychological theory of activity, Tarasov de-
scribes linguistic consciousness as images of mental consciousness that constitute 
a person’s perceptual and conceptual knowledge about the objects of the world. 
These images of consciousness require externalizations that can be observed, 
which may be represented as objects, actions, or words [5]. Thus, linguistic con-
sciousness is viewed as a set of linguistically externalised mental images of con-
sciousness developed by members of a certain culture. This contains concepts of 
man and their activities as well as concepts of objects and phenomena [5]. Tarasov 
also stresses that an important function of externalization is to communicate men-
tal images across generations, for example, a mental image of the Russian 
house/home can be developed if one perceives it from its both inside and outside 
and lives in a Russian family setting. This shows that externalization reveals cul-
tural and mental peculiarities that can be studied [5]. Ufimtseva states that people 
communicate by using special signs (mostly linguistic) drawing on the knowledge 
accumulated within their native culture [19]. 
Leading Russian psycholinguists agree on the following characteristics of 
linguistic consciousness:  
1. It manifests images of consciousness indirectly and materially, and can 
therefore be studied; 
2. It can be described as mental images having linguistic equivalents, which are 
characteristic of a specific community and can be extrapolated; 
3. It reflects cultural and mental peculiarities and moral standards of a 
community. This makes linguistic consciousness a tool not only for linguistic and 
psychological analysis but also for the analysis of cultural perspectives of a 
community. 
The reason for applying an approach that is relatively unknown in the 
academic community outside the Russian Federation lies in the fact that the 
methodology of Russian psycholinguistics enables researchers to easily and 
effectively investigate the individual language user’s mental inventory and 
organization of lexemes (mental lexicon). Furthermore, associations as a 
research technique have been used since the late 19th century when Galton’s 
first association experiments [20] shaped the psycholinguistic research of the 
20th century [21, 22]. In recent years, the technique has experienced a new 
renaissance due to new informatic analytical tools able to collect word 
association data [23, 24] that are able to shed new insights into the structure of 
the mental lexicon based on word association data [23, 25].  
In Hungary, one of the most notable applications of the association technique 
was the Agykapocs (Connectyourmind) experiment conducted to demonstrate how 
94                            Istvan Lenart, Irina Yu. Markovina, Orsolya Endrody 
 
the networked structure of the lexicon can be captured and how these structures can 
contribute to a better understanding of the mental lexicon. The association data were 
collected online with different methods of network science being applied to analyse 
the data. It was shown that words that have a globally central position (can be seen 
as central elements of the networks) are at the same time partly and locally central 
(they have a central role in local, small structures as well) [26]. Furthermore, it was 
revealed that the central elements were in parallel in the analysed Hungarian 
network and in the Florida Word Association Database [27] (see more about the 
advantages of the association method in Section 2.2.). 
 
2.1.2. How linguistic consciousness can be studied 
 
The notion of linguistic consciousness is a result of the cooperation between 
linguists and psychologists, and being at the interface between these two scienc-
es, it enables researchers to study speech, language, mental consciousness, and 
culture. As Ushakova states, developing the term in a specific study is supposed 
to provide an opportunity to enrich our knowledge not only of the speech and 
language phenomena, but also of consciousness as a mental phenomenon [16]. 
At the same time, the investigation of linguistic consciousness is associated 
with a number of problems, one of which is the inability to study consciousness 
directly and objectively. Tarasov states that “the distorting character of images 
of consciousness in their externalization” is a challenge for researchers [5]. 
To meet this challenge, an association test involving a large number of sub-
jects can be conducted as it can been seen as a way of averaging. This implies 
that statistically processed association test data show the various fragments of 
linguistic consciousness of a typical language speaker. Conducting an associa-
tion experiment results in constructing associative fields of stimulus words. 
Ufimtseva asserts that an associative field is not only a fragment of verbal 
memory but also a fragment of the world image of a particular language speaker 
reflected in the consciousness of an average cultural representative, his or her 
judgments and motivations, i.e. cultural stereotypes [28]. 
Distortion of the images of consciousness can be caused by mental mecha-
nisms that externalise images in words as well as by many other factors that 
influence the validity of the association experiment. For instance, the limitation 
may be that some respondents tend to react in a biased way, i.e. in the form of a 
favourable approach to a certain topic or word-stimulus. 
The absence of an agreed definition of the term linguistic consciousness 
gives rise to one more challenge, i.e. the conclusions drawn ultimately depend on the 
individual researcher’s interpretation [16]. Linguistic consciousness lies at the inter-
face between both mental and material phenomena. A researcher may tend to 
present a transition from one phenomenon to another as a simple and direct one 
[16]. The transition is possible dependent on whether we know how the image 
of consciousness is transformed into an externalised sign or object (in our case, a 
word). Without understanding this process, we cannot scientifically explain how 
mental and material phenomena are related to each other. 
Preschool children’s verbal image of the world                                    95 
 
 
However, with the advent of the so-called association dictionaries and asso-
ciative thesauri [29, 30] the focus of interest moved to the problem of interpreting 
the results of association tests. 
 
2.1.3. The role of linguistic consciousness in communication 
 
As mentioned above consciousness is a mental phenomenon that cannot be 
studied directly. To gain access to it, it has to be externalised as linguistic signs 
that people select based on their knowledge acquired in their cultural environ-
ment. It could be suggested that we may succeed in communicating our con-
sciousness images to other people via linguistic signs if we share with them 
common knowledge as well as cultural stereotypes. Within a community, mutual 
understanding and interaction are possible because communicators use definitions 
and interpretations shared by all members of this community [18]. 
This explains why representatives of one culture freely understand each other 
and why there are failures in intercultural communication (even if there is no lan-
guage barrier). The latter is determined by the fact that people of different cul-
tural backgrounds lack commonality of consciousness [5]. 
It can be concluded that in order to improve intercultural communication it is 
important to reveal features of linguistic consciousness in people from different 
cultural backgrounds. Intercultural communication has a pivotal role in the 
modern world of globalization and growing international cooperation, consequent-
ly, studying problems of intercultural miscommunication is essential. Studying 
common and distinct features of linguistic consciousness in people of different 
cultural backgrounds will contribute to problem solving. 
 
2.1.4. Techniques to study the content of consciousness images 
 
Ufimtseva points out that peculiarities of images of consciousness (cultural ste-
reotypes) can be revealed as a result of either conscious introspection or organised 
experimental research [31]. Association test technique and associative dictionaries 
and thesauri developed based on the data obtained are now widely used to gain ac-
cess to the content of mental images and, through this, reconstruct the verbal image 
of the world of particular language speakers. The benefit of this approach is that an 
association dictionary entry may be regarded as a model of linguistic consciousness 
of a language speaker representing a certain culture. It demonstrates the world im-
age, features of culture-specific mindset, ethnic character, and communicative po-
tential of native language speakers [31]. 
 
2.2. Association experiment as a research tool to reconstruct the content  
of the consciousness image externalised by a word 
 
2.2.1. Association experiment from the psycholinguistic perspective 
 
As Ufimtseva states, linguistic consciousness can be studied only as a result 
of the former activity in its “converted” form and alienated from an individual’s 
96                            Istvan Lenart, Irina Yu. Markovina, Orsolya Endrody 
 
consciousness forms [28]. In other words, to be able to analyse it, we need an ex-
ternalised, materialised form of linguistic consciousness. 
There are several types of an association experiment: free, directed, and link-
ing associative experiments. The technique most commonly used to externalise 
linguistic consciousness is the free association experiment, wherein an individu-
al is given a list of words and is instructed to respond with the first word that 
comes to mind. In most cases, respondents are university students. The test is 
commonly carried out in the native language of the subject. 
A major advantage of an association experiment is its relative simplicity in 
conducting: no special equipment or setting is needed, and the instructions are 
easy to understand and follow. Another benefit of this approach is that it saves 
time. The test may be conducted in a room with a large number of respondents, 
which saves time in data collection. Another advantage is that a large number of 
responses may be collected simultaneously, enabling the extrapolation of results 
to all representatives of a particular culture. The large number of respondents 
secures a relative stability of association fields. Ufimtseva [7] summarises the 
advantages of applying the association experiment as follows: 1) it reflects the 
experiences of native speakers of a certain language; 2) it displays the relative 
importance of lexemes, thus refers to their hierarchy in language (with this 
method it is also possible to identify the core elements of the linguistic lexicon); 
3) it can be applied to any language; and 4) it is not artificially constructed by a 
linguist (as in the majority of traditional dictionaries). 
In the context of the current research, the authors underline the additional 
benefits of the application of the association experiment including: 5) the exper-
iment can be conducted as a kind of game, which can effectively be applied with 
young respondents; 6) the natural situation created during the survey enables 
respondents to provide spontaneous and less artificial responses; 7) the experi-
ment is easily administered with no special technical equipment needed; 8) the 
experimental process can easily be explained to different age groups, including 
children. 
However, there are certain limitations of this experimental technique. Many 
factors may influence the results of the test. One of these is that there are some 
factors independent of the experiment itself (neither the researcher nor the re-
spondent can influence it). Among the factors is the active vocabulary of the 
respondent, age, sex, profession, and geographical conditions. A high frequency 
of the response man to the stimulus word woman is explained by a large number 
of female respondents [5]. In the experiment performed by Alexey A. Leontev, 
respondents reacted differently to the stimulus word brush depending on their 
profession and geographical conditions. Research by Russian psychologists and 
linguists showed that respondents with technical background give more para-
digmatic responses whereas subjects studying the humanities tend to give more 
syntagmatic reactions [32, 33]. 
Factors such as time and conditions of a test as well as a respondent’s physi-
cal and emotional state may have an impact during the experiment. Thus, results 
may be distorted because of the respondent’s fatigue caused by the length of the 
Preschool children’s verbal image of the world                                    97 
 
 
experiment (e.g. phonetic associations that are not typical of adult respondents 
врач — грач [doctor — rook]). The place where the experiment is conducted 
can also have an effect on the results (e.g. institute — here). All these limitations 
should be well understood and noted in each association research. 
In the Hungarian literature, application of the association experiment as a lin-
guistic research method is less widespread than in Russia. Several authors at-
tempted though to map Hungarian language users’ mental lexicon by applying 
the association experiment, including the compilation of the Encyclopedia of 
Hungarian Norms of Associations [34]. Kovacs strongly relies on the association 
method when he investigates concept systems and lexical networks in the Hun-
garian mental lexicon [29]. He discusses the role of associative networks both on 
the level of language users in general and on the language acquisition process in 
early childhood. 
 
2.2.2. Association experiment from the pedagogical perspective 
 
Since the research is related to the Early Childhood Development and Con-
ception of Childhood theory, it is important to mention the basics of the attitude 
toward such young learners. The authors believe that all knowledge is based on 
human interactions and is constructed based on social context [35]. Childhood 
conceptions are based on the idea that children must be seen as social actors [11] 
and be capable of determining their own lives [36]. According to the related re-
search, 4- to 5-year-old children look for differences, patterns and change, and 
are able to ask questions about why things happen and how things work. They 
also show interest in and curiosity about understanding social structures such as 
family or institutional groups. 
 
2.2.3. Association field 
 
The association field is a set of reactions to a stimulus word. An association 
field consists of a nucleus with the most frequent reactions and a periphery. In 
terms of its content, it reflects both a person’s verbal memory and a fragment of 
the verbal image of the world, judgments, attitudes, and motivations of the re-
spondents as representatives of a certain culture (see: Russian Association Dic-
tionary 2002). Furthermore, it needs to be emphasised again that, although there 
are some individual variations in responses, the fact that the respondents repre-
sent one culture secures association fields with relative stability. 
The so-called semantic gestalt of an association field developed by Karaulov 
is one of the methods to reconstruct the knowledge about the surrounding world 
in the linguistic consciousness of native speakers [17]. The method is based on 
dividing the reactions of one association field into several semantic zones by unit-
ing similar features of an object or a phenomenon. To make it convenient, the 
semantic zones are marked by pronouns that reflect general ideas, e.g. who (per-
sons), what (objects), which (attributes), this (structures in which the pronoun 
‘this’ acts as a hypothetical link), to do/to make (actions), where (places), and 
98                            Istvan Lenart, Irina Yu. Markovina, Orsolya Endrody 
 
when (time). At the same time, it is possible to identify additional semantic 
zones [17]. 
 
2.2.4. Associative dictionaries 
 
Conducting large-scale association experiments resulted in creating the so-called 
association dictionaries, or thesauri of word associations. Today, there are two major 
Russian dictionaries: Russian Association Dictionary (RAD) developed by Juri 
Karaulov, Galina Cherkasova, Natalia Ufimtseva, Yuri Sorokin, and Evgeny Tara-
sov, and the Slavic Association Dictionary (SAD) developed by Natalia Ufimtseva, 
Juri Karaulov, Galina Cherkasova, and Evgeny Tarasov. The RAD contains around 
1300 stimulus words and about 13,000 different reactions. The fullest English asso-
ciation dictionary is The Associative Thesaurus of English, The Edinburgh Associa-
tive Thesaurus developed by G.R. Kiss, C. Armstrong, and J. Piper. The English 
Associative Thesaurus contains more than 23,000 words. 
The reactions in a dictionary entry are given in a decreasing order of frequen-
cy. Each reaction has its own index, the number of respondents who reacted to a 
stimulus word with this word. 
An association dictionary is truly a unique reference source because it gives 
information about the most frequent word links that characterise cultural fea-
tures, and no other dictionary contains such information. Thus, an association 
dictionary holds a large amount of data that enables researchers to study culture, 
linguistic consciousness, and ‘text potential’, i.e. the cultural and linguistic 
background of the respondents for text perception and understanding. Associa-
tion dictionaries allow the researcher to identify and study the systemic charac-
ter of the world image of representatives of different cultures. To do this, re-
searchers reveal the nucleus of language consciousness, i.e. the units of a seman-
tic network that have the largest number of links with other units of this seman-
tic network represented in the thesaurus (dictionary) [37]. 
Thus, researchers in different fields will find their own field-specific data in 
an association dictionary. A philosopher will reveal the constituent parts of the 
image of the world; a culture studies expert will discover the system of axiologi-
cal patterns and attitudes of a certain culture; a psychologist will see the propor-
tion of linguistic and extra-linguistic knowledge contained in the image of the 
world of representatives of a certain culture [37]. 
The present cross-cultural research has been conducted in line with the theo-
retical and experimental approaches described. The authors attempted to make a 
step forward by developing and modifying the techniques already existing in this 
research field. We hope some innovative approaches presented and results ob-
tained will form a convincing argument in favour of an interdisciplinary study 
conducted by an intercultural team of researchers. 
 
3. Methods 
 
The underlying methodological background of the research is the association 
experiment [6], which is based on the free associations of respondents to a given 
Preschool children’s verbal image of the world                                    99 
 
 
stimulus-word. Researchers apply this method for conducting smaller-scale re-
search on well-defined research questions, as well as for compiling large- scale 
associative dictionaries including the Russian Associative Dictionary [37]; the 
Slavic Associative Dictionary of the Russian, Belarusian, Bulgarian and Ukrain-
ian languages [38]; and the Russian Regional Associative Dictionary “EURAS” 
[39] to mention a few. 
In this research, 10 stimulus words (friend, child, family, water, black, 
toy/game, devil, home, foreigner, angel) were selected from the following 
sources: five stimuli from the core lexicon of Russian linguistic consciousness 
[40] with their ranks in parentheses дом (home, #2), друг (friend, #10), вода 
(water, #18), ребенок (child, #19,5), черный (black, #49,5); one stimulus 
word – игрушка (toy) – from the 18 initial stimuli of the Russian Children’s 
Associative Thesaurus [41]. The authors’ essential endeavour when selecting the 
above mentioned six stimulus words was to guarantee that 1) the selected words 
were within the core linguistic lexicon (most frequently used words of the lan-
guage); 2) the words were semantically closely connected to children’s everyday 
life; and 3) the words were simple, easy-to-understand lexemes, appropriate for 
conducting research with 4- to 5-year-old respondents. 
Finally, four stimuli were selected as the authors’ subjective choice in order to, 
on the one hand, better map the children’s self-perception and their concept of a 
family (семья/family), and, on the other hand, add some atypical lexemes that 
were less frequently used by this age group, including angel (ангел), foreigner 
(иностранец), and devil (чёрт). In line with ethical standards of academic re-
search, informed consent was obtained. 
The selection of the ten stimulus words and the more detailed analysis of the 
five items most closely connected with childhood (friend, child, family, 
toy/game, home/house) as well as their investigation with a combination of the 
association experiment, corpus linguistic methods and a pedagogical approach 
enabled the authors to map and compare Hungarian and Russian preschoolers’ 
perception of the outside world. 
Regarding the pedagogical perspective of the dichotomy of angel and devil, 
it must be stated that, in the studies of history of childhood, one of the thought-
provoking questions is about the polarised approaches whether children are di-
vine or of diabolical nature [14]. According to the Christian doctrine of the orig-
inal sin, based on St. Augustine’s theories, it is necessary to be baptised in order 
to wash away the diabolical taint. On the other hand, Luther believes that human 
beings are innocent in the first 5 to 6 years of their lives.  
The 10 selected Russian stimulus words were translated into Hungarian, with 
the following remarks on the translation problems of equivalence. The stimulus 
noun ребенок (child) can be translated into both gyermek (more formal) and 
gyerek (less formal), and, in line with the respondents’ age group, the latter, less 
formal word form was prioritised. The Hungarian word játék has a wider denota-
tion in the Hungarian language when compared to Russian and means both иг-
рушка (toy) and игра (game). Дом denotes both a house (ház) and a home (ot-
thon) in the Russian language; in line with the focus of the research otthon 
100                            Istvan Lenart, Irina Yu. Markovina, Orsolya Endrody 
 
(home) was selected as its Hungarian equivalent and was included in the list of 
initial stimuli. A peculiar element of the Russian lexicon чёрт was singled out. 
This noun is one of the possible translations of the English word devil, besides 
дьявол, бес, and сатана: the lexeme in addition means in colloquial language 
usage: heck. 
Two series of kindergarten surveys were accomplished with 100–100 re-
spondents: one in Russia (in two kindergartens in Moscow), and the second one in 
Hungary (97 interviews in urban areas, in 7 cities including Budapest, Szeged, 
Tata, Zalaegerszeg, Gödöllő, Kistarcsa, and Veresegyház as well as three re-
spondents from a village, Kesztölc). Participants of the research were 4- to 5-
year-old preschool children born in 2013–2014. During a 15–20-minute inter-
view, the children were requested to say out aloud whatever came to their mind 
when hearing the stimulus words. The questionnaire consisted of 27 questions on 
the 10 word-stimuli (2 to 4 sub-questions for each stimulus word). In contrast 
with a typical association experiment, several questions were applied for each 
stimulus word in order to gain a more significant amount of linguistic infor-
mation that could be transformed into a relatively large corpus. This enabled the 
authors to analyse the results not only through the classical frequency lists of the 
association experiment, but also with corpus linguistic tools. 
The interviews were conducted with the application of the shoulder-to-
shoulder method [9], an approach that originates from pedagogy [42], which pre-
sumes that children from this age group are typically reluctant to speak openly 
and express their feelings in a classical interview situation. The shoulder-to-
shoulder approach goes back to paired or partner reading; a teaching strategy that 
enhances reading fluency by two students sitting next (shoulder to shoulder) to 
each other, sharing a book. The method itself enhances children’s elaboration of 
a certain theme, which is primarily important in this age group in order to reduce 
their inner tensions and stress created during everyday life activities. In this re-
search, the method was applied so that interviewers were asked to create an in-
formal situation, allowing the children to free-play, to walk, draw and move dur-
ing the interview. This contributed to a better atmosphere, where children were 
more willing to communicate. Moreover, if the 15–20-minute conversation could 
not be completed at once, then the data collectors stopped and continued later 
when the child felt ready for the conversation. According to Ginnis, everyone 
needs to feel emotionally secure and psychologically safe [43]. 
Answers to all 27 questions were registered either in written form or by voice 
recorder, and later transcribed to text. All replies were entered into Excel files, 
and then the authors created 22 separate searchable corpora: 10–10 corpora were 
based on the 10 stimulus words from the Hungarian and the Russian results, an-
other two corpora were created containing all responses from the Hungarian and 
from the Russian respondents, respectively. The Hungarian corpus consisted of 
19,967 tokens and 15,319 words, while the Russian corpus incorporated 16,268 
tokens and 12,646 words. 
The linguistic data were analysed with the Sketch Engine corpus linguistic 
tool [10] firstly on the separate (stimulus-based), then on the cumulated (coun-
Preschool children’s verbal image of the world                                    101 
 
 
try/language-based) level. Frequency results were compiled and contrasted with two 
comparable gigaword corpora from the Araneum corpus family [44]: the Araneum 
Russicum Russicum Maius corpus (1,200,000,258 tokens, 859,319,823 words) and 
the Araneum Hungaricum Maius corpus (1,200,001,609 tokens, 792,549,686 
words), while keyword analysis was executed with Russian Web 2011 (ruTen-
Ten11; 18,280,486,876 tokens, 14,553,856,113 words) and Hungarian Web 2012 
(huTenTen12; 3,161,920,362 tokens, 2,572,620,694 words) [10]. 
The results of the association experiment which served as the core method of 
this research were compared with the huge stock of linguistic data of the Arane-
um corpora, utilising an in-build function of the Sketch Engine tool; the thesauri 
of the investigated stimulus words [10]. Thesauri, as defined by Sketch Engine, are 
semantically similar or synonymous items of a corpus that can be identified by 
analysing the typical collocations of the given stimulus words. 
 
4. Results 
 
4.1. Individual stimulus words 
 
Both the Hungarian and the Russian responses (up to 10 respective stimulus 
words each) were collected and analysed individually.  
In this section, we discuss in detail five of the ten stimulus words; each of them 
being easy to understand, and the most closely connected to early childhood: friend, 
child, family, toy/game, and home/house. The results are grouped in accordance with 
the association method; according to the frequency of each response word, a list is 
created beginning with the most frequent word. The top four responses are displayed 
in the tables below (Tables 1–5). The responses are collected and displayed in three 
groups depending on their word classes: nouns, adjectives and verbs were taken into 
account (other word classes were excluded). 
 
4.1.1. Friend 
 
Друг (friend) is the 10th most typical item in the Russian linguistic con-
sciousness nucleus [40]. Barát, a noun that, although obviously not semantically 
identical to its Russian counterpart, is without doubt the Hungarian equivalent. 
However, there were no translation problems. 
The results showed a similarity (Table 1), with the top responses nearly coin-
ciding in the category of adjectives (kind/dear, good and cute among the Hungar-
ian and good, kind and nice among the Russian responses). The top two verbs 
associated with the concept of friend also proved to be identical (play and love), 
while the third and fourth most frequent words differed from each other although 
referring to a common activity with someone. The most remarkable difference 
could be observed between the noun responses, where the Russian results re-
flected a personality focus (boy, girl, person, female friend). Meanwhile, in the 
Hungarian results, the inanimate entities objects prevailed (toy, nursery, court). 
 
102                            Istvan Lenart, Irina Yu. Markovina, Orsolya Endrody 
 
T a b l e  1 
Associations of the stimulus words BARÁT (FRIEND) and ДРУГ (FRIEND),  
results of the research 
 
barát (friend)
друг (friend) 
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
játék (game / 
toy) 14; anyu-
ka (mother) 
13; ovi 
(nursery) 10; 
udvar (court) 
6 
kedves 
(kind/dear) 
44; jó (good) 
33; aranyos 
(cute) 5 
játszik (play) 
130; szeret 
(like/love) 42;
épít (build) 7 
мальчик (boy) 
14; девочка 
(girl) 12; чело-
век / машинка 
(person/car) 
10; подруга 
(female 
(friend) 6 
хороший 
(good) 35; 
добрый 
(kind) 16; 
красивый 
(nice) 7 
играть (play) 
85; любить / 
дружить (love 
/ be friends) 42; 
помогать 
(help) 30; гу-
лять (walk) 16 
ad (give) 6 
 
 
T a b l e  2 
Thesauri of the stimulus words BARÁT (FRIEND) and ДРУГ (FRIEND)  
from the Araneum comparative corpora 
 
barát (friend)
друг (friend) 
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
lány (girl) 
316,289; fiú 
(boy) 
162,514; apa 
(father) 
125,193; 
család (fami-
ly) 350,449 
kedves(kind/d
ear) 214,709 
szeret 
(like/love) 
983,599; 
gondol 
(think) 
568,644 
человек (per-
son) 
2,021,397; 
родитель 
(parent) 
220,563; ребе-
нок (child) 
510,992; 
жизнь (life) 
908,095 
другой (oth-
er) 1,716,427;
такой (such) 
2,544,728; 
каждый 
(each) 
1,108,658; 
самый (most) 
1,354,155 
стать 
(become) 
1,074,175 
hisz (believe) 470,096;  
mond (say) 1,324,910 
 
The thesauri results of the words barát (friend) and друг (friend) automati-
cally identified similar words or synonyms extracted from respective corpora. In 
this paper, the comparative corpus family Araneum and its Hungarian and Rus-
sian gigaword corpora were used to compare the preschool children’s associations 
with adults’ language use based on a massive amount of linguistic data (1,2 bil-
lion tokens in each of the two corpora). 
Similarities between Hungarian adults’ and children’s language use (Table 2) 
include the key role of the adjective kind and the verb love when analysing the 
stimulus word friend, as well as a curious difference in associating mother to a 
friend among the children’s results, and father to the same stimulus word in the 
adults’ corpus. 
A visualization of the aforementioned results is displayed in Figure 1, where 
the most typical collocations of the word barát (friend) and друг (friend) are 
grouped depending on their grammatical relations and their role in the sentence 
(verbs with; modifiers of; subject of; object of etc.). 
 
Preschool children’s verbal image of the world                                    103 
 
 
   
 
 
Fig. 1. Visualization of the associations of stimulus words 
BARÁT (FRIEND) and ДРУГ1 
 
In the Russian chart, настоящий (real) appears besides хороший (good) as 
opposed to the Hungarian adjective jó (good) as the main characteristic of a 
friend. In the Hungarian linguistic consciousness, the chart suggests that a friend 
usually helps, plays with the pony, moreover, friends stick together, while in the 
Russian example, the diagram shows playing, helping and being friends. It must 
be noted that Russian morphology allows the use of the verb дружить (be 
friends), originating from the noun друг (friend). The reaction word дружить is 
an example from the Russian language of a stimulus-reaction connection partly 
based on similar sound. 
 
4.1.2. Child 
 
The image of a child also proved to be similar in the Hungarian and Russian 
linguistic consciousness. All four of the most frequent adjectives (small, big, good, 
kind) coincided in the lists of associations, while two of the four most typical 
verbs (grow up, love) were also identical. Cry (плакать) as a verb connected to a 
child’s image only appeared in the Russian top 4 but not in the Hungarian. 
Based on the visualization charts (Figure 2), the small–big dichotomy ap-
pears amongst the associations of a child in both groups of respondents (big be-
ing present in the Hungarian and small in the Russian sample). Significant dif-
ferences are visible in the chart in terms of activities associated with a child: in 
Hungarian, collocations of a child describing their activities include néz (look), 
csinál (do), lesz (will be), van (is), meanwhile, the Russian sample displays вос-
питывать (raise), обижают (hurt), and бывать (be). 
                                         
1 Labels of the Hungarian chart: barát (friend); jó (good); közös (common); Ágika (Ági-
ka); kedves (kind); anyuka (mother); Nati (Nati); segít (help); van (be); lesz (will be); össze-
tart (stick together); pónizik (plays with the pony. Russian labels: друг (friend); настоящий 
(real); хороший (good); играть (play); со (with); дружить (be friends); помочь (help); быть 
(be); значит (mean). 
104                            Istvan Lenart, Irina Yu. Markovina, Orsolya Endrody 
 
T a b l e  3 
Associations of the stimulus words GYEREK (CHILD) and РЕБЁНОК (CHILD),  
results of the research 
 
gyerek (child)
ребёнок (child)
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
kisbaba (small 
baby) 10; baba 
(baby) 9; játék 
(toy/game) 7; óvo-
da / anyuka / 
fiú/lány (nursery / 
mother / boy / girl) 
6 
kicsi (small) 
54; nagy 
(big) 22; jó 
(good) 20; 
kedves 
(kind) 13 
felnő (grow up) 
35; játszik (play) 
28; válaszol 
(reply) 13; 
szeret (like/love) 
11 
малыш (kiddy) 
46; человек 
(person) 18; 
мама (mom) 
17; мальчик 
(boy) 8 
маленький 
(little) 44; 
хороший 
(good) 10; 
добрый 
(kind) 6; 
большой 
(big) 6
расти / 
плакать 
(grow up / 
cry) 6; 
любить / 
родить 
(love/be 
born) 5 
 
T a b l e  4 
Thesauri of the stimulus words GYEREK (CHILD) and РЕБЁНОК (CHILD)  
from the Araneum comparative corpora 
 
gyerek (child)
ребёнок (child)
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
gyermek (child) 
376,113; ember 
(man/person) 
1,248,639; 
szülő (parent) 
180,688; lány 
(girl) 316,289 
fiatal 
(young) 
318,105; 
kicsi (small)
369,164; 
szeret (love) 
983,599; akar 
(want) 799,720; 
lát (see) 
1,050,286
человек (per-
son) 
2,021,397; 
малыш (kiddy) 
136,028; 
женщина 
(woman) 
377,996;  
родитель 
(parent) 
220,563
детский 
(children’s) 
298,287; 
данный 
(given) 
731,108; 
молодой 
(young) 
223,831 
стать 
(become) 
1,074,175 
jó (good) 2,041,516;  
kis(little) 644,146 
 
  
 
 
Figure 2. Visualization of the associations of stimulus words 
GYEREK (CHILD) and РЕБЁНОК (CHILD)1 
                                         
1 Labels of the Hungarian chart: gyerek (child); nagy (big); jó (good); néz (look), csinál 
(do), lesz (will be), van (is), rossz (naughty); olyan (such). Russian labels: ребёнок (child); 
воспитывать (raise); обижают (hurt); бывать (be) глаз (eye); маленкий (small/little). 
Preschool children’s verbal image of the world                                    105 
 
 
Results of the Araneum corpus displayed several corresponding results in the 
Hungarian language: a child is small and good, and love as a verb plays a central 
role in the semantics of the word. Some top noun results of the Russian data co-
incided including the nouns, малыш (kiddy) and человек (person). 
 
4.1.3. Family 
 
The word family does not belong to the core lexicon of the Russian linguistic 
consciousness, nor is it included in the list of 18 initial stimuli of the Russian 
children’s associative thesaurus [41]. Nevertheless, this lexeme was included in 
this study as the concept of a family constitutes an integral part of a child’s lin-
guistic consciousness. Furthermore, it helps in comparing the Hungarian and the 
Russian concepts of a family. 
 
T a b l e  5 
Associations of the stimulus words CSALÁD (FAMILY)  
and СЕМЬЯ (FAMILY), results of the research 
 
család (family)
семья (family)
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
anya/anyuka 
(mother) 140; 
apa/apuka (fa-
ther) 121; gyerek 
(child) 35; mama 
(mom/grandma) 
23 
kedves 
(kind) 27; 
jó (good) 
23; nagy 
(big) 17; 
igazi (real) 
10 
szeret (love) 26;
játszik (play) 12;
mond (say) 11; 
megy (go) 10 
мама (mom) 
146; папа 
(daddy) 134; 
бабушка 
(grandma) 50;
дедушка 
(grandpa) 40 
хорошая 
(good) 40; 
добрая 
(kind) 20; 
большая 
(big) 19; 
дружная 
(friendly) 17 
любить 
(love) 26; 
жить 
(live) 13; 
ходить 
(go) 7; 
дружить 
(be friends) 
5
 
A general feature of the frequency list of both respondent groups reveals that 
the strongest association from the stimulus word family is mother, followed by 
father. In the Russian context grandmother and grandfather follow. The Hungar-
ian children mentioned child and mama (which may mean either mother or 
grandmother depending on the context) after their parents. The comparison of 
activities connected with the term family displays love in the first place and to go 
within the top 4 associations (presumably referring to common activities of the 
family that include travelling or going somewhere together perceived as a com-
mon activity). Adjectives used in describing a family almost fully coincide: 
kind, good, big, and real are identified in the Hungarian, while good, kind, big, 
and friendly occur in the Russian group. 
Significant differences can be pinpointed in the perception of a family when 
comparing the children’s and adults’ results. Children’s perspective reflects a 
self-centred approach when the family is characterised by the mother, the father, 
and grandparents, meanwhile key elements of the concept of a family are the 
child, and the verb live as the data of the Araneum corpus suggests. 
 
 
106                            Istvan Lenart, Irina Yu. Markovina, Orsolya Endrody 
 
T a b l e  6 
Thesauri of the stimulus words CSALÁD (FAMILY) and СЕМЬЯ (FAMILY)  
from the Araneum comparative corpora 
 
család (family)
семья (family)
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
gyermek 
(child) 
376,113; 
gyerek (child) 
412,046; 
ember (man / 
person) 
1,248,639; 
élet (life) 
901,881 
fiatal 
(young) 
318,105 
él (live) 
675,558; 
szeret (love) 
983,599 
родитель 
(parent) 
220,563; 
дитя (child) 
617,06; 
жизнь (life) 
908,095; ре-
бёнок (child) 
510,992 
молодой 
(young) 
223,831;  
русский 
(Russian) 
364,077;  
данный 
(given) 
731,108 
стать (be-
come) 
1,074,175; 
хотеть 
(want) 
600,660; 
жить (live) 
310,494; 
смочь (be 
able to) 
454,904 
 
The visualization charts complement the above results with further infor-
mation, including the fact that in the Hungarian context the closest term to fami-
ly is real, while in Russia it is love and nice. A diminutive form of family ap-
pears in the Russian chart: семьячка, similarly to other reaction words in the 
study e.g. братик (bro), сестрёнка (sis). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Visualization of the associations of stimulus words 
CSALÁD (FAMILY) and СЕМЬЯ (FAMILY)1 
 
 
                                         
1 Labels of the Hungarian chart: család (family); igazi (real); jószívű (warm-hearted); 
kedves (kind); szokik (used to); marad (stay); apa (father). Russian labels: семья (family); 
красивый (nice); любить (love); быть (be); получиться (form); большой (big); ещё (and); 
семьячка (family [diminutive]). 
Preschool children’s verbal image of the world                                    107 
 
 
4.1.4. Toy/game 
 
In the Hungarian language, there are no separate lexemes for toy and game, 
the two denotations are expressed by the same word: játék. In Russian however 
toy is translated as игрушка and game as игра. In this research, игрушка (toy) 
was selected from the stimuli of the Russian children’s associative thesaurus 
[41] and játék (toy/game) was chosen as the Hungarian equivalent, keeping in 
mind that the Hungarian word has a narrower meaning. 
Notwithstanding the semantic differences, both groups of respondents asso-
ciated toy with the same two most frequent verbs (activities): play and like/love. 
The top noun associations also displayed remarkable similarities depicting the 
objects preschoolers play with on a daily basis including a doll and a car. For the 
above reasons, игра (game) appeared exclusively among the Russian associa-
tions, while the Hungarian group frequently mentioned Lego and train. 
Adjectives from the collection of the Hungarian associations diverged from the 
Russian results: Russians described a toy as favourite, small, real, and soft, 
meanwhile good and with dolls proved to be the most typical description of toy 
for the Hungarian participants. 
 
T a b l e  7 
Associations of the stimulus words JÁTÉK (TOY/GAME)  
and ИГРУШКА (TOY), results of the research 
 
játék (toy/game)
игрушка (toy)
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
legó (Lego) 
15; baba 
(doll) 13; 
autó (car) 11; 
vonat (train) 9 
jó (good) 6; 
babás (with 
dolls) 5 
játszik (play) 
75; szeret 
(like) 31; 
rajzol (draw) 
10; legózik 
(play Lego) 7 
кукла (doll) 
36; машинка 
(small car) 
30; игра 
(game) 15; 
машина (car) 
13 
любимый
(favourite) 10;
маленький 
(small) 9; 
настоящий 
(real) 6; мяг-
кий (soft) 5 
играть (play) 
70; любить 
(like/love) 14 
 
The charts below (Figure 4) shed light on a grammatical feature of the Rus-
sian language, namely the presence of prepositions as the most significant collo-
cations of игрушка (toy). Both prepositions в and во mean in, and are typical co-
occurrences of the word играть in phrasal verbs such as играть в игрушки 
(play with toys), играть в самолётики (play with small helicopters), or играть 
в ракеты (play with rockets). Typical collocations of the Russian word игрушка 
(toy) include шарик (ball) and бусинка (bead); according to the collected Hun-
garian data, játék (toy/game) implies homework and paw. Typical Hungarian verb 
associations of játék (toy/game) are szeret (love/like) and beszél (talk). 
Both in the children’s associations and in the adults’ corpora, the word toy is 
connected with the verb love/like. The Hungarian data coincide in the adjective jó 
(good), while the Russian results confirm the relevance of the adjectives малень-
кий (small) and любимый (favourite). 
 
108                            Istvan Lenart, Irina Yu. Markovina, Orsolya Endrody 
 
T a b l e  8 
Thesauri of the stimulus words JÁTÉK (TOY/GAME) and ИГРУШКА (TOY) 
from the Araneum comparative corpora 
 
játék (toy/game)
игрушка (toy)
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
dolog (thing) 
689,192; kép 
(picture) 
457,672; 
élet (life) 
901,881; film 
(film) 240,233 
jó (good) 
2,041,516 
szeret (like) 
983,599; lát 
(see) 
1,050,286; ad 
(give) 
1,130,654; 
akar (want) 
799,720 
вещь (thing) 
204,821; кук-
ла (doll) 
25,945; 
подарок (gift)
149,121; 
украшение 
(clothing) 
70,343 
маленький
(small) 
233,154;  
любимый 
(favourite) 
131,875; 
детский 
(children’s) 
298,287;  
новогодний 
(New Year’s) 
52,824 
любить (love) 
226,488 
 
  
 
 
Figure 4. Visualization of the associations of stimulus words  
JÁTÉK (TOY/GAME) and ИГРУШКА (TOY)1 
 
4.1.5. Home/house 
 
The problem of equivalence arose in the case of the stimulus words дом and ot-
thon. Дом means house and home at the same time, while in the Hungarian lan-
guage otthon means home and ház denotes house. This is reflected in the associa-
tions of the Russian stimulus дом as it includes lexemes typical for the notion of 
a building: построить (build), кирпич (brick), этаж (floor), and крыша (roof). 
The Hungarian results reflected a meaning that is emotionally closer to the re-
                                         
1 Labels of the Hungarian chart: játék (toy/game); jó (good); olyan (such); lecke (home-
work); szeret (love/like); beszél (talk); van (be); mancs (paw). Russian labels: игрушка (toy); 
в (in); во (in); мягкий (soft); быть (be) шарик (ball); бусинка (bead). 
Preschool children’s verbal image of the world                                    109 
 
 
spondents, among the identified associations objects and concepts from the pre-
schoolers’ daily lives prevailed including, szeret (like/love), játszik (play), alszik 
(sleep), játék (toy), ágy (bed), and szoba (room). One colour term appeared in 
the top Russian results, белый (white) and another one in the Hungarian data set: 
sárga (yellow). 
 
T a b l e  9 
Associations of the stimulus words OTTHON (HOME) and ДОМ (HOUSE/HOME),  
results of the research 
 
otthon (home)
дом (house/home)
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
ház (house) 
41; játék 
(toy/game) 
24; ágy (bed) 
17; szoba 
(room) 16 
jó (good) 34; 
nagy (big) 28;
emeletes (sto-
reyed) 12; 
sárga (yellow) 
9 
lakik (live) 32;
szeret (love) 
19; játszik 
(play) 17; 
alszik (sleep) 
9 
кирпич (brick) 
33;этаж 
(floor) 32; 
человек 
(person) 26; 
крыша (roof) 
16
большой (big)
33; белый 
(white) 22; 
высокий 
(high) 19; 
красивый 
(nice) 11 
жить (live) 
77; постро-
ить (build) 
10; сделать 
(did) 7 
 
The aforementioned results are presented below (Table 10). Similar to the as-
sociations of the noun family, the adjective настоящий (real) is one of the most 
typical adjectives of the analysed word дом (house/home). 
 
T a b l e  10 
Thesauri of the stimulus words OTTHON (HOME) and ДОМ (HOUSE/HOME)  
from the Araneum comparative corpora 
 
T10
otthon (home)
дом (house/home)
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
NOUN 
ADJ 
VERB 
ház (house) 
325,627; hely 
(place) 
845,533; 
gyerek (child) 
412,046; lakás 
(flat) 142,856 
fiatal (young) 
318,105; szép 
(nice) 390,404
szeret (love) 
983,599; lát 
(see) 
1,050,286; 
akar (want) 
799,720; 
vesz (buy) 
921,675 
квартира 
(flat) 376,505; 
здание 
(building) 
257,693; 
помещение 
(premises) 
257,693;  
место (place) 
257,693
новый (new) 
1,400,083; 
жилой 
(residential) 
134,344; 
большой (big)
911,214; дан-
ный (given) 
731,108 
стать 
(become) 
1,074,175; 
иметь (have) 
1,243,296; 
являться 
(appear) 
1,282,940 
 
Otthon (home) and ház (house) are closely connected in the Hungarian lan-
guage based on both the results of this survey and the large-scale data of the 
Araneum corpus. The Russian results suggest that the main characteristic of дом 
(house/home) is большой (big). 
 
110                            Istvan Lenart, Irina Yu. Markovina, Orsolya Endrody 
 
  
 
 
Figure 5. Visualization of the associations of stimulus words 
OTTHON (HOME) AND ДОМ (HOUSE/HOME)1 
 
4.2. Overall data 
 
Based on the respondents’ utterances, two corpora were created from the 
Hungarian and the Russian data set (see Table 11). We excluded articles, conjunction 
words, prepositions, and modal verbs from this summary to be able to focus on 
the key elements. The analysis of the overall inputs of the Hungarian (HU100) and 
the Russian (RU100) research phases demonstrates the following phenomena ob-
servable in the linguistic consciousness of the Russian and Hungarian preschool 
children: 1) the most frequent noun in both cultures was mother (мама/anya), 
followed by father (папа/apa); 2) the nouns child or kid (малыш/gyerek); house 
or home (дом/ház); and friend (друг/barát) play a central role in the linguistic 
consciousness of preschoolers in both countries, ranking in the top 10 most fre-
quent items; 3) playing is a key concept in both corpora: in the Hungarian cor-
pus, it appears in the lexical item játék (game/toy), while in the Russian data set in 
the form of a verb (играть/play); 4) the Russian results are more diverse in 
terms of word classes. Top 15 Russian responses include personal pronouns (3), 
nouns (6), adjectives (4) and verbs (2), while the Hungarian top 15 is limited to 
personal pronouns (4) and nouns (11).  
Keywords are useful and illustrative indicators of a corpus: they signal those 
lexemes that are significantly more frequently present in the investigated corpus 
than in the reference corpus. In this research, two giant corpora were used as ref-
erences to the overall results of the Hungarian (HU100) and Russian (RU100) 
research phases. The two reference corpora are web-based collections of texts: 
Russian Web 2011 (14,553,856,113 words) and Hungarian Web 2012 
(2,572,620,694 words) [10]. 
                                         
1 Labels of the Hungarian chart: otthon (home); játszik (play); van (be); szeret (love), 
ilyen (such); jó (good), ahogy (how); nagyon (a lot). Russian labels: дом (home); в (in); 
настоящий (real); белый (white) построил (built); жить (live). 
Preschool children’s verbal image of the world                                    111 
 
 
T a b l e  11 
Top 15 most frequent words (excluding articles, conjunction words,  
prepositions, and modal verbs) 
 
№ 
Hungarian (HU100)
Russian (RU100)
word 
frequency 
word 
frequency 
1 
én (I) 
228 
он (he)
161 
2 
ő (he/she) 
194 
мама (mother)
158 
3 
anya (mother)
145 
я (I)
144 
4 
gyerek (child)
129 
папа (father)
136 
5 
apa (father)
118 
маленький (small)
117 
6 
játék (game/toy)
111 
человек (person)
103 
7 
barát (friend)
77 
дом (house/home)
75 
8 
mi (we) 
76 
играть (play)
69 
9 
család (family)
58 
малыш (kid)
54 
10 
ház (house)
58 
мы (we)
53 
11 
ők (they) 
54 
большой (big)
50 
12 
anyuka (mother)
53 
друг (friend)
47 
13 
ruha (clothes)
52 
люблю (love)
47 
14 
víz (water) 
48 
белый (white)
47 
15 
szárny (wing)
46 
хорошая (good)
45 
 
Keywords were selected in two groups: single-words (containing one lex-
eme) and multi-words (containing two lexemes). Results of the single-word 
keywords search display a clear reference to the general activities of preschool 
children (Table 12). In the Hungarian context, they tend to play Lego, play with 
the dollhouse, play hide and seek, play with dolls, play board games, play with 
dinos, play tag, and play with pony. In the Russian context, children mentioned 
the following activities according to the list of the top 15 key single words: play 
Lego, play hide and seek, play tag, and play with cars. Playing Lego is without 
doubt the most popular activity in both groups, taking first and third place in the 
Hungarian sample, and second in Russian. 
Further activities that appeared in the key single word analysis of the Hun-
garian data included misbehaving (rosszalkodik), while in the Russian context 
they were to be friends (дружить) and to draw (чертить), as well as pencil 
(карандаш) referring presumably to the activity of drawing as well. 
The Hungarian results reflected preschool children’s linguistic consciousness 
centred around their daily activities, toys, and playing games (12 key single 
words of 15). However, this was less typical in the Russian sample where only 
six lexical items of 15 referred to such activities or to toys. Furthermore, family 
members appeared in a significantly higher proportion in the Russian sample 
where bro (братик) took first place, and little sister (сестрёнка) and dad 
(папа) also ranked in the top 15. The Hungarian sample only included one refer-
ence to family members, ranking no. 14 of 15: kistesó (small brother/sister). 
The appearance of Jézuska (little Jesus) and szarv (horn) can only be ob-
served in the Hungarian results. In the Russian sample крылышко (little wing) 
and крыльев (wings) are over-represented when compared to the reference cor-
pora. Both items may have religious/cultural connotations. 
112                            Istvan Lenart, Irina Yu. Markovina, Orsolya Endrody 
 
T a b l e  12 
Top 15 key single-words (without proper names, double occurrences) 
 
№ 
Hungarian (HU100) 
Russian (RU100) 
word 
frequency 
word 
frequency 
1 legózik (play Lego)
13 
братик (bro)
31 
2 babakonyha (dollhouse)
11 
лего (Lego)
15 
3 lego (Lego) 
8 
прятки (hide and seek)
16 
4 bújócska (hide and seek)
9 
догонялки (play tag)
7 
5 babázik (play with dolls)
10 
ребёнок (child)
5 
6 szarv (horn) 
28 
дружить (be friends)
49 
7 Jézuska (little Jesus)
14 
сестрёнка (little sister)
5 
8 társasozik (play board game)
6 
домик (small house)
4 
9 plüss (plush) 
12 
крылышко (little wing)
10 
10 bújócskázik (play hide and seek)
6 
крыльев (wings)
3 
11 rosszalkodik (misbehave)
8 
чертить (draw)
3 
12 dínósat (play with dinos)
4 
карандаш (pencil)
3 
13 fogócskázik (play tag)
5 
чёрный (black)
3 
14 kistesó (small brother/sister)
8 
папа (dad)
146 
15 póni (pony) 
10 
машинка (car [diminutive])
46 
 
Several examples of lacunas could be identified as a result of the keyword 
analysis. Lacunas are linguistic gaps, or lexemes with no equivalent in the other, 
contrasted culture/language. These lexical items can be explained in the light of 
the so-called lacuna theory [4, 18, 46]. The Russian word дружить (to be 
friends) is an example of a cross-cultural lacuna as the expression has no Hun-
garian equivalent. Its meaning is an activity when the participants stay together 
and spend time or play together as friends. Similarly, társasozik (play board 
games) is a widespread term often used by Hungarian children that does not have 
a clear equivalent in the Russian language. 
A second type of keywords are key multi-words consisting of two lexemes, 
such as igazi család (real family). These words frequently appear together in the 
observed language; and, similar to key single-words, appear more frequently in 
the analysed corpus than in the reference corpus. Table 13 displays these strong 
word connections that are over-represented in the preschool children’s corpus, 
with a minimum of three occurrences. 
Similarly to the key single-word results (Table 12) the Russian sample contains 
more items connected to the family (лучшая семья/best family; красивая 
семья/nice family) as well as reference to family members (младшая 
сестра/younger sister). The key role of family in the Hungarian preschoolers’ lin-
guistic consciousness is reflected by the strongest keyword combination, igazi csa-
lád (real family). However, there is no further example of the notion of family or of 
family members in the Hungarian list of most typical key multi-words.  
Black and white are seemingly the most typical colours preschoolers actively 
use in both languages. They appeared six times of 18 in the Hungarian sample 
and three times of 17 in the Russian results. Two more colours were identified in 
the top results of the Hungarian sample including red (piros szarv/red horn) and 
blond (szőke haj/blond hair). 
Preschool children’s verbal image of the world                                    113 
 
 
T a b l e  13 
Top key multi-words (with at least 3 occurrences) 
 
№ 
Hungarian (HU100) 
Russian (RU100) 
multi-word 
frequency
multi-word 
frequency 
1 
igazi család (real family) 
8 
наименьший малыш (tiny 
[lit.:smallest] baby) 
10 
2 
fehér ruha (white
dress/clothes) 
8 
наименьший человек (tiny 
[lit.:smallest] person) 
7 
3 
külföldi ember 
(foreign person) 
6 
настоящий дом (real house/home)
6 
4 
nagy gyerek (big kid)
5 
плохое слово (bad word)
5 
5 
másik ország (other
country) 
5 
чёрный цвет (black colour) 
5 
6 
fekete szarv (black horn)
5 
лучший друг (best friend)
4 
7 
rossz gyerek 
(naughty kid) 
4 
наибольший кирпич
(huge [lit.:largest] brick) 
4 
8 
szőke haj (blond hair)
4 
лучшая семья (best family)
4 
9 
nagy ház (big house)
4 
худший человек (worst person)
4 
10 fekete ruha (black
dress/clothes) 
4 
белый дом (white house) 
3 
11 fehér szárny (white wing) 
4 
наибольший дом (huge 
[lit.:largest] house) 
3 
12 fekete ceruza (black
pencil) 
3 
игре прятки (hide and seek game) 
3 
13 plüss cica (plush kitten)
3 
большая комната (big room)
3 
14 rossz dolog (bad thing)
3 
красивая семья (nice family)
3 
15 emeletes ház (storeyed
house) 
3 
младшая сестра (younger sister) 
3 
16 fehér a ruha (the
dress/clothes is white) 
3 
наибольший человек (huge 
[lit.:largest] person) 
3 
17 piros szarv (red horn) 
3 
чёрный человек (black person) 
3 
18 Zsuzsi vonat
(Zsuzsi train) 
3 
 
Conclusions 
 
Any interdisciplinary research such as the current one inevitably needs to 
take several perspectives into account. Thus, linguistic, psychological and peda-
gogical aspects were emphasised in the design, execution and interpretation of 
the study. Relying on the psychological and psycholinguistic theories [activity the-
ory: Leontiev 1978; speech activity theory: Leontiev 1993; lacuna theory: Mar-
kovina 2006], as well as the methods [association experiment: Ufimtseva 2014a; 
shoulder-to-shoulder method: Griffin et al. 2014] and blending those with corpus 
linguistics and pedagogical theories [childhood as a social construction: 
James&Prout, 1997], the research aimed at shedding light on the linguistic con-
sciousness of 4- to 5-year-old preschool children coming from the target cul-
tures. 
Applying perspectives stemming from multiple disciplinary fields and blend-
ing methods from both linguistic and pedagogical areas, contributed to gaining 
114                            Istvan Lenart, Irina Yu. Markovina, Orsolya Endrody 
 
an overall picture of Russian and Hungarian preschoolers’ linguistic conscious-
ness. In this cross-cultural research, not only an interdisciplinary approach was 
successfully applied, but the linguistic methods were also merged into an amalgam 
of the classical Russian psycholinguistic perspective and of the state-of-the-art 
corpus linguistic frame of reference. 
The authors identified a significant proportion of universalistic features in 
terms of the Russian and Hungarian preschoolers’ linguistic consciousness. 
A family is seen in both the Russian and the Hungarian sample as represented by 
the mother in first place, followed by the father (top 2 noun associations in both 
groups), the main characteristics of a family are kindness and being good (top 
2 adjective associations in both samples) and the most representative emotion 
(verb) in both countries proved to be love. Similarly, in both groups, friend is 
described as a kind, good and cute/nice person, and is associated with the activi-
ties, to love and to play with. Furthermore, a child is characterised as small, good 
and kind in both samples, and main noun and verbal associations of a child include 
the response-words baby/kiddy, mother, to grow up and to love. The above re-
sults reconfirm that the linguistic consciousness in this age group bears a signifi-
cant proportion of similar, universalistic features, with key notions of childhood 
(friend, child, family, toy, home) being similar across Hungarian and Russian 
cultures. 
Nevertheless, a remarkable amount of culture- and language-bound items 
were identified in the research such as the strong association between друг–
дружить or маленький–малыш (friend–to be friends; small–kiddy): etymolog-
ically and morphologically similar words); and чёрт–чёрточка–чёрный (small 
devil–line–black: three lexical items in the Russian language of similar sounding 
but different etymology). Moreover, several phenomena of lacunarity [18, 46] 
were pinpointed in the research. The phenomenon of the Lacuna Paradox [46] 
between Hungarian and Russian stimulus words was identified, including the 
words дом (that denotes house and home at the same time in the Hungarian); the 
Hungarian word játék that denotes both toy (игрушка) and game (игра) in Rus-
sian; or ördög (devil) that can be equally translated into дьявол (devil), чёрт 
(small devil), бес (demon) or сатана (Satan). 
Examples abound of the effects of globalization revealed on identifying ob-
jects and notions of modern technology, including tablets, cartoons, brand 
names (Lego, Duplo, Trudi). Lego and to play with Lego proved to be significant-
ly over-represented in the children’s responses (compared to the respective 
adults’ corpora). Besides playing with Lego, preschoolers’ linguistic conscious-
ness precisely described some of the central activities of children in both coun-
tries. The key single-word analysis proved to be an effective tool for gaining in-
sight into preschoolers’ activities: hide and seek, tag, play with dinos, with pony, 
play with dolls or draw. 
All in all, the selection of the 10 stimulus words and the more detailed analy-
sis of the five items most closely connected with childhood (friend, child, fami-
ly, toy/game, home/house), as well as their investigation with a combination of 
the association experiment, corpus linguistic methods and a pedagogical approach 
Preschool children’s verbal image of the world                                    115 
 
 
assisted us in identifying and comparing Hungarian and Russian preschoolers’ per-
ception of the outside world in a more successful way. 
 
References 
 
1. Vygotsky, L.S. (1962) Thought and language. Cambridge MA: MIT Press. 
DOI: 10.1037/11193-000 
2. Vygotsky, L.S. (1978) Mind in society: The development of higher psychological 
processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
3. Leontiev, A.A. (1993) Yazykovoe soznanie i obraz mira [Language consciousness and 
the image of the world]. In: Yazyk i soznanie: Paradoksal;naya ratsionalnost’ [Language and 
consciousness: Paradoxical rationality]. Moscow: Institute of Linguistics, RAS.  pp. 16–21. 
4. Sorokin, J.A. (1993) Die Lakunen-Theorie. Zur Optimierung interkultureller 
Komminikation. In: Ertelt-Vieth, A. (ed.) Sprache, Kultur, Identität. Selbst-und 
Fremdwahrnehmungen in Ost-und Westeuropa. Frankfurt am Main; Berlin: Peter Lang. 
pp. 163–173. 
5. Tarasov, Y.F. (1996) Yazykovoe soznanie – perespektivy issledovaniya [Language 
consciousness – research perspectives]. In: Etnokulturnaya spetsifika yazykovogo soznaniya 
[The ethnocultural specificity of language consciousness], Moscow: Institute of Linguistics, 
RAS. pp. 7–22. 
6. Ufimtseva, N.V. (2014a) Russian Psycholinguistics: Contribution to the Theory of 
Intercultural Communication. International Communication Studies. XXIII:1. pp. 1–13. 
7. Ufimtseva, N.V. (2014b) The Associative Dictionary as a Model of the Linguistic 
Picture of the World. Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences. 154. pp. 36–43. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.10.108 
8. Lenart, I. (2017) Associations and verbal consciousness: an analysis based on four 
English and one Hungarian translation of Bulgakov’s novel: The Master and Margarita. 
Neohelicon. 44. pp. 487–504. DOI: 10.1007/s11059-017-0386-9 
9. Griffin, M., Lahman, M. & Opitz, M. (2014) Shoulder-to-shoulder research with 
children: Methodological and ethical considerations. Journal of Early Childhood Research. 
14 (1). pp. 18–27. DOI: 10.1177/1476718X14523747 
10. Kilgarriff, A. et al. (2014) The Sketch Engine: ten years on. Lexicography. 1. pp. 7–
36.  DOI: 10.1007/s40607-014-0009-9 
11. Hendrick, H. (2000) The child as a social actor in historical sources. In: Christiansen, 
P. & James, A. (eds) Researck with children. London: Falmer Press. 
12. Heywood, C. (2001) A History of Childhood. Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 
13. Endrody-Nagy, O. (2016) Paintings and Illuminated Manuscripts as Sources of the 
History of Childhood: Conceptions of Childhood in the Renaissance, In: Benedek, A. & 
Veszelszki, Á. (eds) In the Beginning was the Image: The Omnipresence of Pictures: Time, 
Truth, Tradition. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang GmbH, Internationaler Verlag der 
Wissenschaften. pp. 91–100. 
14. Endrody-Nagy, O. (2018) A brief history of childhood – as seen on visuals. Revista de 
Didácticas Específicas. 19. pp. 100–107. DOI: 10.15366/didacticas2018.19 
15. Scherba, L.V. (1974) Language system and speech activity. Leningrad: Nauka. (In 
Russian). 
16. Ushakova, T.N. (2003) Yazykovoye soznaniye i prinzypy ego issledovaniya [Verbal 
consciousness and the principles of its research]. In: Yazykovoye soznanie i tekst: 
teoreticheskiye i prikladnye aspekty [Verbal consciousness and text: theoretical and practical 
aspects]. Barnaul. pp. 6–17. 
17. Karaulov, Yu.N. (2000) Pokazatyeli natsionalnogo mentaliteta v associativno-
verblanoy setii [National mentality indicators in an associative-verbal network]. In: 
Ufimtseva, N.V. (ed.) Yazikovoe soznanie i obraz mira [Language consciousness and image 
of the world]. RAN Institute of Lingusitics. Moscow. pp. 191–206. 
116                            Istvan Lenart, Irina Yu. Markovina, Orsolya Endrody 
 
18.  Markovina, I. & Sorokin, Y. (2006): The lacuna phenomenon and the problem of 
foreign culture comprehension: An experimental study of lacuna elimination strategies. In: 
Panasiuk, I. & Schröder, H. (Hrsg.) Lakunen-Theorie: Ethnopsycholinguistische Aspekte der 
Sprach- und Kulturforschung. Semiotik der Kultur. Band 5. Münster-Berlin-Hamburg-
London-Wien: LIT Verlag. pp. 154–160.  
19. Ufimtseva, 
N.V. 
(2006) 
Etnopsikholingvistika: 
vchera 
i 
segodnya 
[Ethnopsycholinguistics: yesterday and today]. Voprosy psikholingvistiki – Journal of 
Psycolinguistics. 4. pp. 92–100. 
20. Galton, F. (1879) Psychometric experiments. Brain. 2. pp. 149–162. 
21. Cramer, P. (1968) Word Association. London: Academic Press. 
22. Nelson, D.L., McEvoy, C.L. & Schreiber, T.A. (1998) The University of South 
Florida word association, rhyme, and word fragment norms. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.usf.edu/FreeAssociation/. 
23. De Deyne, S. & Storms, G. (2008) Word Associations: Network and semantic 
properties. Behavior Research Methods. 40/1. pp. 213–231. 
24. Kovács, L., Orosz, K. & Pollner, P. (2012) Magyar szóasszociációk hálózata [The 
network of Hungarian word associations]. Magyar Tudomány. 6. pp. 699–705. 
25. Gravino, P. et. al. (2012) Complex structures and semantics in free word association. 
Advances in Complex Systems. 15/3-4. p. 1250054-1. 
26. Bóta, A. & Kovács, L. (2015) The community structure of word association graphs. 
The Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Applied Informatics. Eger. pp. 113–
120. 
27. Kovács, L. et al. 2020) Központi szavak és azok közösségei a mentális lexikon 
hálózataiban. In: Balázs, G., Imrényi, A. & Simon, G. (eds.) Hálózatkutatás – Hálózatok a 
nyelvben. Budapest: Magyar Szemiotikai Társaság. pp. 207–220. 
28. Ufimtseva, N.V. (2009) Image of the world of Russians: the systemic characteristics 
and the content. Yazyk i kul’tura – Language and Culture. 4 (8). pp. 98–111. 
29. Kovacs, L. (2013) Fogalmi rendszerek és lexikai hálozatok a mentális lexikonban 
[Concept systems and lexical networks in the mental lexicon]. Budapest:  Tinta Konyvkiadó. 
30. Kovacs, L. (2014) Agykapocs.hu / Connectyourmind.com online database. 
31. Ufimtseva, N.V. (2011) Yazykovoe soznanie: dinamika i variativnost’ [Language 
consciousness: dynamics and variability]. Moscow: Institute of Linguistics, RAS. 
32. Vasilevich, A.P. (1987) Issledovaniye leksiki v psikholingvisticheskom eksperimente 
[Investigation of lexis in a psychological experiment]. Moscow: Nauka. 
33. Ilyasov, 
I. 
(1974) 
Psikhologocheskiye 
I 
fisiologicheskiye 
metody 
psikholongvisticheskogo issledovaniya [Psychological and physiological methods of 
psycholinguistic research]. In: Leont’ev, A.A. (ed.) Osnovy teorii rechevoy deyatel’nosti 
[Fundamentals of the theory of speech activity]. Moscow: Nauka.  
34. Lengyel, Zs. (2008) Encyclopedia of Hungarian Norms of Associations. Budapest:  
Tinta Kiado. 
35. Crotty, M. (ed.) (2008) The foundations of social research: meaning and perspective 
in the research process. Thousand Oaks, CA; Sage. 
36. James, A. & Prout, A. (eds) (1997) Constructing and Reconstructing Childhood. In: 
Contemporary Issues in the Sociological Study of Childhood. London; Washington, D.C.: 
Falmers Press, Taylor & Francis Group. DOI: 10.4324/9781315745008 
37. Karaulov, Yu.N. et al. (2002) Russkiy assotsiativnyy slovar’ [Russian Associative 
Dictionary]. Vols 1, 2. Moscow: AST-Astrel’. 
38. Ufimtseva, N. et al. (eds) (2004) Slavyanskiy Assotsiativnyy Slovar’: Russkiy, 
Belorusskiy, Bolgarskiy, Ukrainskiy [Slavic Associative Dictionary: Russian, Belorussian, 
Bulgarian, Ukrainian]. Moscow: Institute of Linguistics, RAS. 
39. Cherkasova, G.A. & Ufimtseva, N.V. (2014) Russian Regional Associative Dictionary 
“EURAS”. Moscow.  
Preschool children’s verbal image of the world                                    117 
 
 
40. Sergieva, N.S. (2006) Semanticheskiy geshtal’t i yadro yazykovogo soznaniya 
russkikh [Semantic gestalt and the core of Russians’ verbal consciousness]. 2006. SUSU 
Bulletin. Social Sciences and Humanities. 2 (57). pp.160–165. 
41. Sokolova, T.V. (1998) Assotsiativnyy tezaurus rebyenka 3–6 let [The associative 
thesaurus of children aged 3 to 6]. Philology Dr. Diss. Astrakhan. 
42. Meisinger, E.B. et al. (2004) Interaction quality during partner reading. Journal of 
Literacy Research, 36. pp. 111–140. DOI: 10.1207/s15548430jlr3602_1 
43. Ginnis, P. (2007) The Teacher’s Toolkit. Crown House, UK. 
44. Benko, V. (2014) Compatible Sketch Grammars for Comparable Corpora. 
Proceedings of the XVI EURALEX International Congress: The User In Focus. 15–19 July 
2014. Bolzano/Bozen: Eurac Research. pp. 417–430. 
45. Leontiev, A.N. (1978) Deyatel’nost’. Soznanie. Lichnost’ [Activity, Consciousness, 
and Personality]. Moscow: Politizdat. 
46. Lenart, I. (2016) Intercultural lacunae in Hungarian-Vietnamese communication, with 
emphasis on entrepreneurial interactions. Doctoral dissertation. Budapes: Eotvos Lorand 
University.  
 
Языковой образ мира детей дошкольного возраста: кросскультурное русско-
венгерское сопоставительное исследование на основе словесных ассоциаций  
И. Ленарт, И.Ю. Марковина, О. Эндроди 
 
Ключевые слова: ассоциативный эксперимент, языковое сознание, раннее детство, 
психолингвистика, межкультурная коммуникация 
 
Данное российско-венгерское кросскультурное междисциплинарное исследование 
посвящено изучению языкового образа мира или языкового сознания детей дошкольно-
го возраста от 4 до 5 лет. С целью выявить сходства и различия в восприятии мира 
детьми авторы применили метод словесных ассоциаций. Были отобраны 10 слов-
стимулов, на которые в ходе свободного ассоциативного эксперимента были получены 
реакции от респондентов исследуемой группы (N = 100 в каждой стране). Слова-
стимулы отобраны таким образом, чтобы они обозначали понятия из ближайшего со-
циального, материального и духовного окружения ребенка дошкольного возраста. Ре-
зультаты, сгруппированные в частотные списки, сопоставили как фрагменты языкового 
сознания носителей венгерского и русского языков. Полученные данные позволяют 
установить, прежде всего, универсальные характеристики русского и венгерского язы-
кового сознания в раннем детстве: например, схожим оказалось восприятие семьи, дру-
га, ребенка. Исследование показало, что как российские, так и венгерские дети ассоци-
ируют семью в первую очередь с матерью, а затем с отцом. И в том и в другом созна-
нии семья характеризуется ассоциатами добрый, хороший, любовь. Друг описывается 
прилагательными добрый, хороший, а основные действия, ассоциируемые с другом, – 
любить и играть. В обеих группах ребенок описывается как маленькое, хорошее и доб-
рое существо, а основными словесными ассоциациями на данный стимул являются: 
малыш, мама, расти и любить. В восприятии 10 исследованных понятий выявлены и 
расхождения, отчасти как результат различий лингвокультурного фона респондентов 
(например, ассоциативные поля слов-стимулов: дьявол и ангел), а отчасти как следствие 
языковой лакунарности, например játék (игра / игрушка). На материале венгерских и 
русских параллельных слов-стимулов авторы также описывают феномен лакунарного 
парадокса. Например, слово дом (которое в венгерском языке означает здание и жили-
ще, квартира одновременно); венгерское слово játék, которое в русском языке имеет 
значения «игрушка» и «игра»; или ördög (дьявол), что может переводиться как дьявол, 
чёрт, бес или сатана. Результаты продемонстрировали эффекты глобализации в обеих 
культурах, о чем свидетельствует присутствие в ассоциативных полях названий меж-
дународных торговых марок (Lego) и объектов современных технологий (планшеты). 
118                            Istvan Lenart, Irina Yu. Markovina, Orsolya Endrody 
 
Кроме того, исследование позволило выявить типичные занятия дошкольников, отра-
женные в их языковом образе мира: например, прятки, метки, игры с динозаврами, 
пони, игры с куклами и рисование. В заключение следует отметить, что сочетание пси-
холингвистических и педагогических подходов оказалось эффективным способом изу-
чения языкового сознания дошкольников, в частности представлений о социальном, 
материальном и духовном окружении, имеющем наиболее важное значение для рус-
ских и венгерских детей исследуемой возрастной группы.  
 
